The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Children's Story of Westminster Abbey,
by G. E. Troutbeck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: The Children's Story of Westminster Abbey

Author: G. E. Troutbeck

Release Date: November 04, 2020 [EBook #63628]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN'S STORY OF
WESTMINSTER ABBEY ***




                        THE CHILDREN’S STORY OF
                           WESTMINSTER ABBEY


[Illustration:

  _Photo W. Rice, F.R.P.S._ _Allen & Co (London) Ltd Sc_

  _Westminster Abbey from Dean’s Yard._
]




                                  THE
                 CHILDREN’S STORY OF WESTMINSTER ABBEY


                                   BY

                            G. E. TROUTBECK
           AUTHOR OF “WESTMINSTER ABBEY” (THE LITTLE GUIDES)


                                NEW YORK
                      FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                            _Published 1909_


                              _Printed by_
                        MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED
                              _Edinburgh_




                                   TO
                 LANCELOT, JACK, KATHARINE AND WILFRID




                                PREFACE


Readers of this little volume must not expect to find in it a full
description of the Abbey buildings, or a complete list of all the tombs,
monuments, and other beautiful and interesting things in the Abbey
Church. That is not the aim of this book. Its chief object is to point
out to British children how they may follow the great outlines of their
country’s history in Westminster Abbey, from the earliest ages down to
our own time,—from the days of the far-off, legendary King Lucius to
those of King Edward VII.

The words, “citizen of no mean city,” ought surely to come into our
minds as we look round the Abbey and see there, as we clearly can see, a
kind of outward expression of all that is best in our national
character. The Abbey speaks to us of the deep religious feeling behind
our shyness and reserve; of patriotism, and of self-sacrifice for our
country; of love and respect for every form of good and noble service;
of the wise moderation in our forms of government; of our wide sympathy
with men of every race and creed.

It is thus that Westminster Abbey can truly claim to be our great
National Church.




                                CONTENTS


 CHAP.                                                              PAGE
    I. THE FOUNDATION AND BUILDING OF THE ABBEY                        1

   II. THE CORONATIONS                                                20

  III. KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR: 1042 TO 1066                        41

   IV. THE PLANTAGENETS OF THE DIRECT LINE FROM HENRY III TO
         RICHARD II: 1216 TO 1399                                     57

    V. THE HOUSES OF LANCASTER AND YORK: 1399 TO 1485                 75

   VI. THE HOUSE OF TUDOR: 1485 TO 1603                               88

  VII. THE HOUSE OF STUART AND THE COMMONWEALTH: 1603 to 1714        110

 VIII. THE HOUSE OF HANOVER AND THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY               143

   IX. THE NINETEENTH AND TWENTIETH CENTURIES                        168

    X. THE WAX EFFIGIES                                              207

   XI. THE MONASTIC BUILDINGS                                        215

  XII. SOME OF THE ABBOTS                                            234

 XIII. WESTMINSTER SCHOOL                                            244




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                              PHOTOGRAVURES

 WESTMINSTER ABBEY FROM DEAN’S YARD                       _Frontispiece_
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

                                                             FACING PAGE
 THE NORMAN CLOISTER                                                  14
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

 TOMB OF PRINCE JOHN OF ELTHAM                                        68
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P S.

 HENRY VII’S CHAPEL                                                  122
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.


                               PHOTOGRAPHS

 KING SEBERT’S TOMB                                                   10
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 CORONATION CHAIR, WITH SWORD AND SHIELD OF STATE                     20
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 NORTH AMBULATORY, WITH TOMBS OF HENRY III AND EDWARD I               30
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

 SHRINE OF KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR                                  40
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 RICHARD II                                                           56
                    From a Photograph by G. A. DUNN.

 TOMBS OF EDMUND AND AVELINE OF LANCASTER AND OF AYMER DE
   VALENCE                                                            62
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 CHAUCER’S TOMB                                                       74
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 MARGARET BEAUFORT, COUNTESS OF RICHMOND, AND MARY QUEEN
   OF SCOTS                                                           90
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 SHAKSPEARE’S MONUMENT                                               104
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 POETS’ CORNER                                                       136
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 MONUMENT OF GENERAL WOLFE                                           142
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

 MONUMENT OF THE EARL OF CHATHAM                                     150
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 STATUE OF WILLIAM WILBERFORCE                                       168
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 CHARLES JAMES FOX                                                   178
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

 STATESMEN’S CORNER, EASTERN AISLE                                   186
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 GRAVES OF NEWTON, HERSCHEL, DARWIN, AND KELVIN                      198
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 WAX EFFIGIES OF QUEEN ELIZABETH AND CHARLES II                      208
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 SOUTH CLOISTER                                                      215
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.

 THE CHAPTER-HOUSE                                                   222
                    From a Photograph by G. A. DUNN.

 THE JERUSALEM CHAMBER                                               238
                     From a Photograph by D. WELLER.

 LITTLE DEAN’S YARD—ENTRANCE TO GREAT SCHOOL                         248
                 From a Photograph by W. RICE, F.R.P.S.




                               CHAPTER I
                THE FOUNDATION AND BUILDING OF THE ABBEY

                                 “_It is finished!
           The Kingliest Abbey in all Christian lands,
           The lordliest, loftiest minster ever built
           To Holy Peter in our English Isle!
           Let me be buried there, and all our Kings,
           And all our just and wise and holy men
           That shall be born hereafter. It is finished!_”
                                        TENNYSON (_Harold_).


The writer of this little book was once showing Westminster Abbey to a
party of foreigners—they were Germans,—and after hearing something about
the Abbey and the people who are either buried or commemorated there,
one of them turned and said: “I can understand the pride of English
people when I see a place like this.”

Now, it must be remembered that this German visitor was not thinking of
our wealth, or of our Empire, or of our commercial prosperity. He was
thinking of the “great cloud of witnesses,” the people of our race who
have gone before us, and who are gathered together, resting and
remembered in our chief national church. He was thinking, too, of the
wide and catholic spirit which would shut out no one who had done good
service to God and man.

If one who was not our own countryman could feel this so strongly, is it
any wonder that the name of Westminster Abbey is dear to all British
folk, men, women, and children, whether at home or across the wide seas?
Westminster Abbey is a name that means “home,” and the story of home,
almost from the very earliest times of our nation.

And if any one asks how and why this is, it is easy to show him that
Westminster Abbey has been part of English history all along, and that
if you can read what is written on the old grey stones of Westminster
you will know more about the British race and Empire than many books
could teach you.

Around the venerable and stately church, where all our Kings, from
Edward the Confessor onwards, have been crowned, and where many of our
sovereigns and most of our famous men are buried, are memories which
speak to us even of the Roman rule in Britain, taking us back nearly to
the days of brave Queen Boadicea, whose statue stands on the bridge
close by.

Then follow memories of the wild Saxon days, of the conversion of
England by St. Augustine, of the Danes, the Normans, the Plantagenets,
Tudors, Stuarts, and of many others.

We are reminded too, of the signing of Magna Charta, of the Barons’ War,
of the Crusades, of the beginning of the House of Commons, of the long
Hundred Years’ War with France, of the Wars of the Roses, of the great
Civil War, of the rise of our Indian and Colonial Empire, and indeed of
all the important things that have happened in our country until this
very twentieth century, when the Abbey is still just as much a part of
our history as it ever was.

If we want to see and understand how this is, we can learn a good deal
from the history of the building itself, that is, of how, when, and
where it was built.

To begin with, what do we mean when we speak of the “Abbey”?

An abbey was really a place where a number of monks or nuns lived, under
the rule of an abbot or abbess,—the name abbot being taken from “abbas,”
the Syriac word for father. The actual church was only a part of the
“Abbey,” to which belonged many other buildings, besides gardens,
orchards, fields and farms, and often large estates in various places.

The Abbey of Westminster was for monks of the Benedictine Order. The
Abbot of Westminster was a very great person, and many well known places
belonged to the Abbey, such, for instance, as Covent Garden (the Convent
Garden) and Hyde Park, besides others which were far away from London.
Windsor at one time belonged to the Abbey of Westminster, but the
Conqueror wanted it himself, and so made the monks exchange Windsor for
land in other places.

The Church, then, which we now call the Abbey, was the Abbey Church of
St. Peter in Westminster. Since the days of Queen Elizabeth, the proper
title of the church has been “The Collegiate Church of St. Peter in
Westminster,” but every one likes to keep the old name, and to call it
Westminster Abbey. As we shall see later on, a good deal still remains
of the old monastic buildings besides the church. Such are the beautiful
cloisters, the Chapter-House, and parts of the library and dormitory.

Now, as to where the Abbey is built. It stands on what was long ago a
desolate little island in the Thames, an island which was overgrown with
great thorns and thickets, and in which wild beasts, such as the wild ox
and the huge red deer, used to roam about. It was perhaps not unlike the
Isle of Athelney, where King Alfred hid from his enemies and made his
plans.

It is interesting to remember that the great Cathedral Church of Paris,
Notre Dame, is also built on an island,—a little island in the river
Seine. In those days, when there were so few roads, it was a great
matter to be near a big river, where boats and ships could go up and
down, and so we find that most important cities, like Rome, Paris,
Vienna, and London, are built on the banks of rivers.

The island on which the Abbey stands was called “Thorney Isle” in those
old days, and it is described in a charter of King Offa as “the terrible
place,” probably because of its wild forests and fierce beasts. The
little streams which once separated Thorney Isle from the mainland still
run underground, but in those early days the island was also surrounded
by a great marsh, which stretched out to Chelsea on the north bank of
the Thames, and to Lambeth and Battersea on the south bank.

The early stories of the foundation and building of the church on
Thorney Isle have been handed down from far-off times, and although they
cannot all be proved to be quite true, we may be sure that there is a
great deal of truth deep down in them, as there is in most of the tales
that people have loved and told to their children through all the ages.

To begin with the oldest story of all. We are told that in the second
century after Christ, while the Romans were still in Britain, a certain
Lucius, a British King, became a Christian. His people also became
Christian, and Lucius built a church at Thorney, where a temple of
Apollo had once stood. Lucius is also said to have built a church where
St. Paul’s now stands, on the site of a temple of Diana.

Another very interesting story is that of the rebuilding of the church
at Thorney in the Saxon times. The Venerable Bede tells us that Sebert,
King of the East Saxons, and nephew of Ethelbert, King of Kent, was
converted to Christianity by St. Augustine in A.D. 603 or 604. The
Norman monks said that this King Sebert built a church and founded a
monastery at Thorney Isle, and a very beautiful story is told about the
consecration of this church of King Sebert’s.

One stormy Sunday night—the very night before Mellitus, Bishop of
London, was to come and consecrate the church—a fisherman named Edric
was casting his nets into the Thames. While he was doing this he heard a
voice calling to him from Lambeth, on the other side of the river, and
when he had crossed over in his boat he found a venerable looking man in
foreign dress, who asked to be ferried over to Thorney Isle. Edric took
him across the river, and when they landed at Thorney the stranger went
at once to the church, leaving the fisherman waiting by the shore. Then,
while Edric watched, a heavenly light seemed to fill all the air, and
angels ascended and descended on a ladder which reached from heaven to
earth. Edric heard the angels singing, and saw how they burned sweet
incense and held flaming tapers. At last the stranger came back, and
said to Edric: “I am Peter, keeper of the keys of Heaven. When Mellitus
arrives to-morrow, tell him what you have seen, and show him the token
that I, St. Peter, have consecrated my own Church of St. Peter,
Westminster, and have anticipated the Bishop of London. For yourself, go
out into the river; you will catch a plentiful supply of fish, whereof
the larger part shall be salmon. This I have granted on two
conditions—first, that you never fish again on Sundays; secondly, that
you pay a tithe of them to the Abbey of Westminster.”

When King Sebert and Bishop Mellitus arrived the next day for the solemn
consecration, Edric met them, bringing a salmon, which he presented to
the Bishop from St. Peter, at the same time telling him the wondrous
story. It is told that the Bishop saw on the church the crosses and all
the marks of consecration, and was satisfied that the fisherman’s tale
was true.

King Sebert is said to have died about the year 616, and he and his wife
Ethelgoda were buried in the church at Thorney. His tomb was replaced in
the great church built on Thorney Isle by Edward the Confessor, and was
finally moved into the present church, where it still remains.

It is supposed that the church at Thorney was left neglected until it
was restored by Offa, King of the Mercians. After his day it was
probably overrun and robbed by the heathen Danes, but it is said to have
been again restored by the great St. Dunstan, who brought some
Benedictine monks from Glastonbury to the monastery at Thorney.

Harold the Dane, son of Canute, was buried at Thorney, but his brother,
Hardicanute, ordered the body to be taken out of its grave and thrown
into the Thames. An old story says: “And he (Hardicanute) caused to be
hurled out the body of Harold, and to be thrown, beheaded, all out of
church; head and body he throws into the Thames. The Danes drew it from
the water, and caused it to be buried in the cemetery of the Danes.”
(St. Clement Danes).

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_

  KING SEBERT’S TOMB.
]

Now we come to the time of Edward the Confessor, when we feel we know
more about the real history.

Edward the Confessor had been in exile in Normandy during the reigns of
the Danish Kings. When Hardicanute died, Edward came back to England,
and was crowned King at Winchester. After he was once settled in his
kingdom he remembered a solemn vow he had made while he was in a foreign
land, and when he doubted whether he would ever get back to England.
This was the vow: “Sire Saint Peter, under whose aid I put myself and my
property, be to me a shield and protection against the tyrant Danish
plans: Be to me lord and friend against all my enemies. To thy service I
will entirely give myself up, and well I vow to you and promise you,
when I shall be of strength and age, to Rome I will make my pilgrimage,
where you and your companion Saint Paul suffered martyrdom.”

The English were most unwilling that their King should leave them, and
go away on such a long and dangerous journey as it was in those days. So
they begged the King to remain, and he sent to ask the Pope what he
might do instead of going to Rome. The Pope answered that he might build
or restore some monastery in honour of St. Peter. There is a beautiful
old story which tells that while the King was thinking over this matter,
and wondering where to build his monastery, a message was brought to him
from a holy hermit of Worcestershire, one Wulsinus, and the message was
as follows: “I have a place in the west of London, which I myself chose,
and which I love. This formerly I consecrated with my own hands,
honoured with my presence, and made it illustrious by divine miracles.
The name of the place is Thorney, which once, for the sins of the
people, being given to the fury of barbarians, from being rich is become
poor, from being stately, low, and from honour is become contemptible.
This let the King, by my command, repair and make it a house of monks,
adorn it with stately towers, and endow it with large revenues. There
shall be no less than the House of God and the Gates of Heaven.”

This, and other reasons, decided the King to rebuild the church at
Thorney Isle, and this great “Minster of the West” was probably begun
about the year 1055. In 1065 the eastern part of the church, that is to
say, the choir and transepts, was ready, and it was consecrated by
Archbishop Stigand on Innocents’ Day, 28th December 1065. King Edward
was too ill to be at the service, so his wife, Queen Editha, had to
represent him.

Edward the Confessor died on 5th January 1066, and was buried the next
day, the Feast of the Epiphany, in front of the high altar of his new
church.

That church was very different to look at from the Abbey we all know at
the present day. It was built in what is called the Norman style, with
massive pillars, round arches, and round-headed windows. It must have
been a very large and splendid church, almost as large as the present
one, only that it was not so high.

The church and the surrounding monastery buildings were finished during
the reigns of the early Norman kings, and William the Conqueror
confirmed the charters granted to the Abbey by the Confessor, and
bestowed yet more lands upon it.

We must now pass over nearly two hundred years, and speak of the time of
King Henry III. In the year 1220, Henry III began to build a very
beautiful chapel, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, at the eastern end of
the Abbey church. It was just about this time that some of the grand
cathedrals of France, such as those of Amiens, Reims, and Chartres, were
being built in that lovely and graceful pointed style which is called
Gothic, but which really comes from France.

Henry III, when visiting his brother-in-law, St. Louis, King of France,
had no doubt seen some of these glorious new churches, and was very
anxious to build one like them in honour of King Edward the Confessor,
for whom he had a great reverence.

[Illustration:

  _Photo W. Rice, F.R.P.S._ _Allen & Co (London) Ltd Sc_

  _The Norman Cloister._
]

Accordingly, in 1245, he began to have the Confessor’s Norman church
pulled down, and in its stead he built the splendid church we now see, a
church which has been called “the most lovely and lovable thing in
Christendom.”

The choir and transepts, the Chapter-House, and some of the cloisters
were built during Henry’s reign. The monks sang service in the new choir
and transepts for the first time on 13th October 1269, when the body of
Edward the Confessor was placed in the magnificent new shrine made for
it by Henry III.

Some of the nave was then gone on with, but it was not built to its
present length until the reign of Henry V. The first time it was used
for a procession was when the Te Deum was sung in thanksgiving after the
Battle of Agincourt in 1415. The money for building this part of the
Abbey was given into the care of a man named Dick Whittington, whom some
people think to have been the famous Lord Mayor of that name. This,
however, is doubtful.

The church built by Henry III is very different from a Norman church.
Instead of round arches, it has very pointed ones; the windows are long
and pointed; the pillars are tall, slender, and graceful. The wonder
seems to be how such a building can have stood for all these hundreds of
years. And indeed it would not stand, if it were not for the beautiful
flying buttresses which support it on the outside.

In the reigns of Edward III and Richard II the cloisters were finished,
and Abbot Litlington built the celebrated rooms known as the Jerusalem
Chamber and the College Hall. A very fine North Porch, called “Solomon’s
Porch,” was built in Richard II’s reign, but unhappily none of it now
remains.

In the year 1503, King Henry VII began the chapel which is known by his
name, and which is so famous for its beauty. It stands on the place
where Henry III’s Lady Chapel stood, but it is much larger than the
older chapel, and some houses had to be pulled down to make room for it,
among them being the house where the poet Chaucer is said to have lived.
Henry VII’s chapel is too elaborate to describe here. The decoration is
so rich and so delicate that it looks almost like lace-work, and the
badges carved on the walls, the Tudor roses, the Beaufort portcullis,
and the fleur-de-lys are a kind of history lesson in themselves. The
fan-tracery vault is most wonderful, both in its lovely design and
splendid masonry work.

We have now come almost to an end of the story of the actual building of
the Abbey,—at any rate of the chief parts of it. The tracery of the
great west window was put up in the year 1498, in Abbot Esteney’s time,
but the glass in it dates only from the reign of George II. The western
towers, which were begun long before, were finished in 1739 or 1740,
from a design made by a pupil of Sir Christopher Wren.

In 1540, King Henry VIII made great changes in the monasteries all over
England. The monks were sent away from Westminster, and their place was
taken by a Dean and twelve prebendaries. For just ten years, from 1540
to 1550, the Abbey was made into a cathedral, or church where a bishop
has his throne. During these years there was a Bishop of Westminster,
but when the bishop resigned, in 1550, his diocese was joined once more
to the See of London.

Henry VIII also made new arrangements for the old School, which had
existed in the monastery from the Confessor’s time.

When Queen Mary Tudor came to the throne she brought the monks back,
with Abbot Feckenham to rule over them, and the old services were
restored for a time.

Queen Elizabeth changed this again, and established the Abbey as a
Collegiate Church, with a Dean and Prebendaries. The present
arrangements are not very different from those of her time, in spite of
certain changes which have had to be made in modern days.

Queen Elizabeth also re-established the School, much on the same plan as
her father had done. She settled that there should be a Head-Master, an
Under-Master, and forty Scholars, who are called either King’s Scholars
or Queen’s Scholars, according as the Sovereign is a king or a queen.

Westminster School always remembers what Queen Elizabeth did for it, and
her name is commemorated in the prayers.

Now, having described something of the foundation and building of the
Abbey, it is time to turn our thoughts to the many important and
interesting things that have happened there, and to the great people of
our nation who are resting within its walls.




                               CHAPTER II
                            THE CORONATIONS


  “_Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anointed Solomon king; and
  all the people rejoiced and said: God save the king, Long live the
  king, May the king live for ever._”—1 Kings i. 39, 40.

The greatest and most important ceremonies which have taken place in
Westminster Abbey are, of course, the Coronations of our Kings and
Queens, and so we will speak first of this most interesting part of the
Abbey history.

Such a wonderful succession of coronations has never been seen in any
other building in the world. Ever since 1066 our sovereigns have been
crowned close to the spot where Edward the Confessor was first buried,
and where the Saxon Harold and Norman William stood more than 800 years
ago.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  CORONATION CHAIR, WITH SWORD AND SHIELD OF STATE.
]

Dean Stanley tells us that the coronation-rite of the Kings of Britain
is the oldest in Europe, and that the inauguration of Aidan, King of the
Dalriadic Scots, by St. Columba, in the sixth century, is the oldest
ceremony of the kind in Christendom. It is good for us to remember these
days of old, for it helps us to understand much better what is going on
now, and teaches us the meaning of many of the solemn services and
ceremonies of Church and State.

The Coronation Service has been slightly changed, of course, from time
to time, but its chief parts are much the same as they were when William
the Conqueror was crowned at Westminster in 1066. From very early times
the coronations had been partly religious and partly civil ceremonies,
and had taken place in a church, the day chosen being either a Sunday or
some high festival, like Christmas Day, Whitsunday, or a Saint’s Day.
The Saxon Kings were usually crowned in Winchester Cathedral. Canute was
crowned at St. Paul’s.

Before speaking of any of the old Westminster Coronations, it will be a
good plan to describe, very shortly, what is done at Coronations in our
own day. We will take the little book of the “Form and Order for the
Coronation of King Edward and Queen Alexandra,” and see what it says.

To begin with, the Sacred Oil for the anointing of the King was
consecrated in the Confessor’s Chapel, and then placed on the altar. The
Litany was said, and a hymn was sung as the clergy, carrying the
Regalia, went down to the west door to meet the King and Queen.

When the King and Queen came into church the choir sang an anthem
beginning with the words: “I was glad when they said unto me, We will go
into the house of the Lord.”

The Westminster scholars have for long years had the right of acclaiming
the King and Queen at the Coronations, and their shouts of “Vivat Regina
Alexandra,” “Vivat Rex Edwardus,” were heard in the anthem as the
sovereigns, first the Queen and then the King, walked up the Abbey.

At Coronations a great platform, called the Theatre, is put up, and
covers a wide space in front of the high altar. On this platform the
Coronation Chair (King Edward’s Chair, as it is called) is placed, and
also the thrones. Here all the principal people stand, and here the
whole great ceremony is performed.

When the King and Queen reached this platform the Archbishop of
Canterbury turned to the people, and asked for what is called the
Recognition, that is to say, he asked whether the people of England were
willing to accept the King, and to do him homage. They answered by
shouting out: “God save King Edward.”

The Regalia were then placed on the altar, and the Archbishop began the
Communion Service. After the Creed the actual Coronation began. The King
first took the solemn Oath to observe the statutes, laws, and customs of
the land, and to cause “law and justice, in mercy, to be executed in all
his judgments.” He also promised to maintain and preserve the Church of
England as by law established. The King then kissed the Book of the
Gospels, and signed the Oath. The Archbishop then began the beautiful
hymn “Come, Holy Ghost, our souls inspire,” sung as a prayer for the
blessing of the Holy Spirit on the King and Queen. After the hymn, the
King, sitting in the Coronation Chair, on the Stone of Scone, was
solemnly anointed with the Holy Oil. Then the Lord Great Chamberlain
girt the King with the Sword of State, and after that the Sub-Dean of
Westminster, acting for the Dean, put on him the Imperial Robe, and the
Archbishop presented him with the Orb. The King then received the Ring,
as a sign of kingly dignity, and then the two Sceptres,—the sceptre with
the cross and the sceptre with the dove.

After this came the putting on of the Crown itself, which was brought by
the Sub-Dean and placed on the King’s head by the Archbishop. The people
again shouted “God save the King”; the peers put on their coronets; the
trumpets sounded, and the great guns at the Tower were fired off.

The Archbishop then presented the Holy Bible to the King, saying these
beautiful words: “Our Gracious King, we present you with this Book, the
most valuable thing that this world affords. Here is wisdom; this is the
royal law; these are the lively oracles of God.”

After this came the Benediction. The King was then led to his throne,
and received the homage of all the princes and peers, the Prince of
Wales being the first to do homage to his father. When that splendid
ceremony was over the Queen was crowned by the Archbishop of York. As
Queen Alexandra was Queen-Consort, she did not sit in King Edward’s
Chair, as of course Queen Victoria did, but she knelt at the altar-step
to be crowned. As she was led to her throne she made a deep obeisance to
the King, who rose and bowed to her.

The actual Coronation being finished, the Archbishop proceeded with the
Communion Service, and the King and Queen received the Holy Communion,
which was administered to them by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Dean of Westminster.

At the end of the service the “Te Deum” was sung, and the whole assembly
cheered as the King walked down the Abbey, in his Royal Robe and Crown,
and bearing the Sceptre and Orb.

This is an outline of the Coronation Service of King Edward VII, and it
is especially interesting because, in spite of some few small changes,
it shows us what the Coronations of our Kings have been like ever since
the Confessor’s days. It may be well just to explain what is meant by
the word “Regalia,” because the history of the Regalia carries us back
to times even before Edward the Confessor, as Offa, King of the
Mercians, is said to have placed the Regalia and Coronation Robes in the
church at Thorney Isle. We should notice that the Regalia, that is, the
crowns, sceptres, and orbs, had Anglo-Saxon names. The King’s crown was
called the crown of Alfred, or of St. Edward; the Queen’s crown was
called the crown of Editha, wife of Edward the Confessor. The sceptre
with the dove was a remembrance of the peaceful days of the Confessor’s
reign, after the Danes were driven out. The Coronation oath used to be
taken on a copy of the Gospels which was said to have belonged to
Athelstane. The orb appears in the famous Bayeux tapestry, showing that
it must have been used in Saxon days.

Now let us turn for a little to some of the Coronations of particular
Kings. As we have seen, the Saxon Kings were usually crowned at
Winchester, as Edward the Confessor himself was.

The first Coronation to take place in the great church founded and built
by the Confessor was that of Harold the Saxon, son of Earl Godwin, and
brother-in-law of the Confessor. There was much anxiety in the country
about the succession, and Harold was crowned at Westminster in great
haste and confusion the day after the Confessor died, and the very day
of his funeral, January 6th, 1066.

The next coronation was indeed different, for many things had happened
in England meanwhile. As we all know, William Duke of Normandy, cousin
of Edward the Confessor, had claimed the throne of England by right of
inheritance. He had sailed over to England, had defeated and slain
Harold at the Battle of Hastings (or Senlac), and was now King. When we
remember that Charlemagne was crowned Emperor in St. Peter’s at Rome by
Pope Leo III on Christmas Day, A.D. 800, it makes it all the more
interesting to think that the day chosen for the Conqueror’s Coronation
was also Christmas Day. He stood there in the Abbey, close to the grave
of the Confessor, having on one side of him the Saxon Aldred, Archbishop
of York, and on the other the Norman Bishop of Coutances. Archbishop
Stigand, of Canterbury, had fled.

In the church were many of the Saxon people of London, and mixed with
them were a number of Normans. Outside, the Norman horsemen kept guard.
When the people began to acclaim the King in the usual English fashion,
the Norman soldiers did not understand what was going on, and thought it
was a riot. Being afraid of what might happen, they set fire to some of
the thatched buildings near the Abbey. The crowd rushed out in alarm,
leaving William alone in the church, with the bishops and other clergy.
A terrible tumult followed, and even the Conqueror trembled. The rest of
the Coronation was hurriedly finished, Archbishop Aldred making William
promise to defend the Saxons before he would put the crown on his head.

The Conqueror, like the Saxon Kings before him and the Norman Kings
after him, used to appear in church on the great festivals wearing his
crown.

From this time onward the Coronations always took place in Westminster
Abbey. All the Regalia were kept in the Treasury at Westminster until
the time of Henry VIII, and some of them until the time of the
Commonwealth. It was part of the duty of the Abbot of Westminster to
instruct and prepare the King for his Coronation. Further, it was
settled by Lanfranc, the first Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, that the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and not the Archbishop of York, was to have
the right to crown the King.

The next Coronation of special interest is that of Henry III, the King
who built the present Abbey Church. When Henry succeeded to the throne
in 1216, after the sad and unfortunate reign of his father, King John,
London was in the hands of the Dauphin of France, Prince Louis. Henry,
therefore, could not be crowned at Westminster, and was first crowned at
Gloucester, by the Bishop of Winchester, not with the crown, but with a
chaplet or garland. It will be remembered that King John’s baggage and
treasures, with the Regalia, had been swept away by the tide as he was
crossing the Wash.

[Illustration:

  [_W. Rice, F.R.P.S._

  NORTH AMBULATORY, WITH TOMBS OF HENRY III. AND EDWARD I.
]

It was not until Whitsunday 1220 that Henry was solemnly crowned in the
Abbey by Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury. He was the last King
to be crowned in the Confessor’s Norman Church. The day before his
Coronation he had laid the foundation-stone of the Lady Chapel, that
beautiful chapel which once stood where Henry VII’s Chapel now stands.

Edward I was in the Holy Land when his father died, and therefore was
not crowned until the year 1274, when he and his beloved Queen, Eleanor
of Castile, were crowned together,—the first King and Queen who had been
jointly crowned. At this Coronation five hundred great horses, which had
been ridden by the princes and nobles, were let loose among the crowd
for any one to catch who could.

The Coronation of Edward I brings two very interesting things to our
mind. These two things are, first, that Edward I was the King who
brought the Stone of Scone from Scotland to England; and secondly, that
it was he who ordered the present Coronation Chair to be made. This
Coronation Chair, which was made in 1307 to contain the Stone of Scone,
is perhaps the most precious thing in all the Abbey, excepting the
Confessor’s shrine.

Some beautiful old stories are told about the Stone of Scone. One of
these stories says that it was the Stone on which Jacob laid his head in
Bethel when he had the wonderful vision of angels ascending and
descending on the ladder which reached from earth to heaven. The sons of
Jacob are said to have taken this sacred stone with them into Egypt,
whence it was carried in after years to Spain, and then to Ireland,
where it was used at the coronations of the Irish Kings. It was placed
on the sacred hill of Tara, and was called “Lia Fail,” or the “Stone of
Destiny.” If a true King sat upon it to be crowned, the stone made a
noise like thunder, but if the King elect was only a pretender the Stone
was silent. One story tells us that the Stone was carried across from
Ireland to Scotland about 330 B.C., by Fergus, the founder of the
Scottish monarchy, and that it was placed, first at Dunstaffnage, and
then at Iona. In A.D. 850 it was brought by Kenneth II to Scone, where
it was enclosed in a wooden chair, as it now is at Westminster. The
Kings of Scotland, from Malcolm IV to John Baliol, sat on the Stone to
be crowned. Edward I himself is said to have been crowned King of
Scotland on the Sacred Stone of Scone after he had defeated John Baliol
at the Battle of Dunbar in 1296. Whether this was so or not, Edward I
carried off the Stone and the Scottish Regalia to Westminster, and
placed them near the Confessor’s shrine.

In the last year of his reign Edward I ordered a chair to be made in
which the Stone was to be enclosed, and in which the Kings of England
were to sit to be crowned. In this very chair every English sovereign
has been crowned, from Edward II to Edward VII. It has only once been
taken out of the Abbey, and that was when it was taken into Westminster
Hall for the inauguration of Cromwell as Lord Protector of the Realm on
December 16th, 1653.

In Edward III’s reign the Scots tried very hard to get the Stone back
again, and the King, who wished to content them, very nearly allowed
them to have it. But the people of London would not hear of such a
thing, and, as an old writer says, “would not suffer the Stone to depart
from themselves.”

We must now speak of some other Coronations. Richard II’s Coronation was
very splendid, and the ceremony was so long and tiring that the King,
who was still quite a boy, fainted from fatigue. Two interesting
ceremonies began at this Coronation. One was the first appearance of the
“Champion,” as he was called. The Champion was a knight who threw down
his glove as a challenge to any one who disputed the King’s claim to the
throne. The last appearance of the Champion was at the Coronation of
George IV, in 1820, so this curious old custom lasted for more than four
hundred years.

Again, Richard II was the first King to be accompanied at his Coronation
by a body of Knights, the Knights who were afterwards called the
“Knights of the Bath.” It became the custom for the King to create a
number of Knights on the eve of his Coronation, and these Knights
accompanied him in his procession. Part of the solemn ceremony of
receiving Knighthood was the taking of a bath, as a sign of purity both
of body and soul.

The Knights of the Bath once used to be installed in Henry VII’s Chapel,
and the Dean of Westminster is always the Dean of the Order. However, no
Knights have been installed at Westminster for a long time past. Many of
the old banners of the Knights of the Bath still hang over the stalls in
Henry VII’s Chapel, just as the banners of the Knights of the Garter
hang in St. George’s Chapel at Windsor. On the backs of the stalls are
the coats-of-arms of the Knights, emblazoned on gilded metal plates.

But to return for a moment to the Coronation of Richard II. It has an
especial interest for Westminster, as the Abbey possesses a most
valuable book, called the “Liber Regalis,” which was drawn up by Abbot
Litlington, and which gives the whole order of the Coronation service.
This has been followed, more or less, at all the Coronations since that
time.

We must now pass over nearly two centuries, and pause to think of the
Coronation of Queen Elizabeth, remembering that it was she who finally
founded Westminster Abbey as a Collegiate Church, and who re-established
the School much on the present plan. Elizabeth’s accession was a very
happy event for her subjects, and there were great rejoicings
everywhere. Her Coronation was the last at which the ancient Latin
Coronation Mass was celebrated, and the Abbot of Westminster took his
part in the service for the last time. His place is now, of course,
taken by the Dean, or by the Sub-Dean, should the Dean be ill or unable
to attend. At Queen Elizabeth’s Coronation the Litany was said in
English, instead of in Latin, and the Epistle and Gospel were read in
both Latin and English, showing that, for the future, our own English
language was going to be used for our Church services.

At the Coronation of Charles I several things happened which people
considered unlucky, and as a sign that misfortunes were coming upon the
King. To begin with, Charles wore white instead of the usual red or
purple, and this was thought to be a bad omen, as if meaning that the
King was to be a victim, there having been some old prophecy of trouble
for a “White King.” Then the sceptre with the dove was broken, and as
the dove could not be mended without the mark being seen, a new dove had
to be made. In the later part of the day a shock of earthquake was felt.
All these things were regarded as signs of coming evil, and were no
doubt remembered in the sad days of the Civil War, and at the time of
the King’s imprisonment and death.

Westminster is a Royal foundation, and the old Royalist spirit always
remained strong there, especially among the boys of Westminster School;
and this in spite of the changes made at the Abbey by the Puritans
during the Commonwealth.

The famous Archbishop Laud, the friend of Charles I, was one of the
twelve Prebendaries of Westminster, and took the Dean’s place at Charles
I’s Coronation.

Charles II and James II were both crowned on St. George’s Day, the
festival of the Patron Saint of England.

William and Mary were crowned as joint sovereigns, Mary sitting in a
Chair of State made for the occasion, a chair which is now to be seen in
Henry VII’s Chapel. She also had the sword and other symbols of
sovereignty given to her, just as her husband, King William, had.

The Coronation of George IV is remembered partly for its magnificence,
but chiefly, perhaps, on account of the sad and foolish attempt to get
into the Abbey made by poor Queen Caroline, and the manner in which she
was turned away from the doors.

The Coronation of Queen Victoria brings us nearer to our own time, and
the thought of that day reminds us of the good Queen whose long life of
anxious work and responsibility began in her early girlhood. She took
upon her the cares of sovereignty at an age when most girls think mainly
of amusing themselves, and we all know how well she kept the solemn
promises made on her Coronation Day at the Abbey.

King Edward VII’s Coronation has already been described. That beautiful
and stately ceremony was all the more touching and impressive because of
the thankfulness of the people for the King’s recovery from a dangerous
illness, a feeling which made their gladness and enthusiasm all the
greater.

This short account of some of the Coronations will help to explain still
further how and why the Abbey has always held such an important place in
our national life. We see that the Norman, Plantagenet, Tudor, Stuart,
and Hanoverian sovereigns have all come here to be crowned, close to the
shrine of the last Saxon King, much in the same way as the French Kings
used to go for their coronations to the great cathedral at Reims, and as
the Tsars of Russia go to the Kremlin at Moscow.

We must now leave the Coronations, and turn to think of some of the
great people who are buried and commemorated in the Abbey.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  SHRINE OF KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.
]




                              CHAPTER III
                       KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR

                                  “_There is
              One great society alone on earth:
              The noble Living and the noble Dead._”
                                  WORDSWORTH (_Prelude_).


King Edward the Confessor is such an important person in the history of
the Abbey that his Chapel and Shrine must be described in a chapter by
themselves.

As has already been told, the Confessor died on January 5th, 1066, and
was buried the next day, January 6th, the Feast of the Epiphany. He was
laid in front of the high altar of his newly built church, and the
Conqueror afterwards presented splendid hangings to cover the simple
tomb which was erected over the grave.

There is an interesting old story of something that happened at this
tomb in the reign of William the Conqueror.

When Lanfranc became Archbishop of Canterbury, most of the Saxon bishops
were sent away and Normans were put in their places. Among the Saxon
bishops was the good old St. Wulfstan, Bishop of Worcester. He was made
bishop in 1062, in the Confessor’s time. The Normans despised him, and
thought him ignorant because he could not speak French, and they thought
he would not be able to give any good advice to the King. Wulfstan was
told that he must come to Westminster to meet the other bishops. They
then said to him that he must give up the pastoral staff, which belonged
to him as a bishop. Wulfstan showed no anger, but only said quite simply
that he would resign his staff, not to the archbishop, “but rather to
St. Edward, by whose authority I received it.” He then went into the
Abbey, walked up to the Confessor’s tomb, and, raising his arm slowly,
he struck the pastoral staff into the stone, saying: “Receive, my lord
the King; and give it to whomsoever thou mayst choose.” It is said that
the staff remained firmly fixed in the stone, so that no one could pull
it out. The King and the Archbishop were amazed, and acknowledged that
they had done wrong in trying to turn Wulfstan out of his bishopric.
They begged Wulfstan to take his staff once more. The old man came near,
and drew the staff out quite easily. The King and the Archbishop went
down on their knees and begged his forgiveness, but, as the old story
says: “He, who had learned from the Lord to be mild and humble in heart,
threw himself in his turn upon his knees.”

We are told that in 1098 the Confessor’s tomb was opened, and that his
body was found to be still in perfect preservation. Bishop Gundulph, of
Rochester, alone ventured to uncover the face. The memory of Edward’s
pure life, and of his goodness and charity, together with the miracles
that were believed to be worked at his tomb, caused the people to honour
him more and more as a saint, and in the year 1161, Pope Alexander III
caused his name to be formally added to the names of the Saints of the
Christian Church. In our Prayer-Books his name appears on October 13th,
as King Edward the Confessor. A “confessor” means some one who has
suffered for the faith of Christ without actual shedding of blood. In
King Edward’s case it alludes to his exile in the time of the heathen
Danes. The “Translation” of which the Prayer-Book speaks means the
moving of the body into the shrine. This “Translation” took place on
October 13th, 1163, when the Confessor’s body was placed in the new and
splendid shrine made for it by King Henry II. This ceremony took place
at midnight, and both Henry II and Archbishop Becket were present.

While the Abbey was being rebuilt in the reign of Henry III, the
Confessor’s coffin was taken for the time to the Palace of Westminster
close by. On October 13th, 1269, it was brought back with great pomp,
and placed in another shrine, more gorgeous even than the former one.

The coffin was carried by the King himself, his brother, Richard, Earl
of Cornwall, his two sons, Edward and Edmund, together with many of the
nobles of the land. Dean Stanley says that this great ceremony must have
reminded Henry III of an equally splendid one which he saw at Canterbury
Cathedral when he was a boy. This was the “Translation” of the relics of
St. Thomas à Becket in 1220, when Henry III walked in the procession.
Pandulf, the Papal Legate (who had come to England in King John’s
reign), and Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury, were there also,
to see Becket’s body placed in the shrine prepared for it.

The chapel in which the Confessor’s shrine stands, and in which so many
of our Kings and Queens are buried, is raised above the rest of the
church by a mound of earth brought from Holy Land. What we now see of
the shrine is only the remains of its former splendour. It was adorned
at first with mosaic-work, and with many gold and jewelled images. The
materials for the decoration were brought from Rome, and the shrine was
made by Italian workmen. In Henry VIII’s time the beautiful decorations
of the shrine, and the various treasures kept near it, were taken away.
The monks were afraid that even the Confessor’s body might be destroyed,
so they buried it in another part of the church. When Queen Mary Tudor
came to the throne the shrine was set up again, and King Edward’s body
was restored to its place. The Queen presented images and jewels for the
adornment of the shrine. Under the Commonwealth the ornaments of the
shrine were again removed, but the Confessor’s body was not removed or
disturbed.

Another interesting story about the Confessor’s shrine must be told
here. When James II was crowned, in 1685, one of the “singing men”
thought he saw a hole made in the Confessor’s coffin by the fall of some
bit of the wooden scaffolding. On going to see, he found that there was
a hole, and he could see something shining inside the coffin. He put in
his hand, and drew out a gold cross and chain, which he gave to the
Dean. The Dean, in his turn, gave this precious cross and chain to the
King. James II, seeing that the coffin was so unsafe, had it enclosed in
another strong and solid one, and since that time the body has rested in
peace. On the north side of the Confessor lies his wife, Queen Editha,
the daughter of Earl Godwin. She is usually supposed to have been a
sweet and gentle woman, but opinions differ a little on this point. At
any rate, she appears to have been very well instructed for those days,
and, we are told, very clever with her needle,—a valuable accomplishment
for any woman. On the south side of the shrine lies the “Good Queen
Maud,” wife of Henry I, and great-niece of Edward the Confessor. As she
was a Saxon princess, her marriage with Henry I made the Saxons and
Normans much better friends than they had been before. Queen Maud was a
very good woman, and very kind to the poor. Neither of these Queens have
any monument.

The Confessor’s shrine was always held to be a most important and sacred
place, and many precious and beautiful things were placed near it, as if
to do it honour. Among these the Stone of Scone was chief. We have
already heard how and when it came to Westminster, and why it was so
greatly prized. But the Stone of Scone was not alone. The coronet of
Llewellyn, the last Welsh Prince of Wales, was taken by Edward I, and
hung up in the Confessor’s Chapel by Edward’s little son Alfonso. Every
one will remember that Edward II—Edward of Carnarvon, as he was
called—was the first Prince of Wales who was the son of an English King.

If we could have visited the Abbey in those old days we should have seen
yet another very interesting thing in the Confessor’s Chapel. This was a
golden cup containing the heart of Prince Henry d’Almayne, son of
Richard Earl of Cornwall, and nephew of Henry III. The story of this
heart takes us back both to the Barons’ War and to the Crusades. It also
takes us back to the great Italian poet Dante, who writes of Prince
Henry’s heart in his famous poem, the _Divine Comedy_.

The story is as follows. At the Battle of Evesham, in 1265, when Simon
de Montfort and the other Barons were fighting against Henry III, Simon
de Montfort was slain. It must be remembered that Simon de Montfort had
married Eleanor, daughter of King John, and that he was therefore
brother-in-law of King Henry III, and of Richard Earl of Cornwall. That
is rather an important part of the story.

Some years afterwards, in 1271, there was a great council held at the
town of Viterbo, in Italy, for the purpose of electing a new Pope. The
King of France, Prince Edward and Prince Edmund of England, and Prince
Henry d’Almayne, came there also, on their way home from the Crusade.
Guy and Simon, sons of the great Simon de Montfort, were also in Italy,
and they, too, went to Viterbo. One day they were all at service in the
Church of San Silvestro, when suddenly, just at the most solemn part of
the Mass, Guy de Montfort rushed forward and stabbed his cousin, Prince
Henry, even while the prince clung to the altar for protection. Not
content with killing Prince Henry, Guy de Montfort dragged him out by
the hair of the head into the square in front of the church. This was
all done in revenge for the death of Simon de Montfort at Evesham. Guy
de Montfort escaped, but was afterwards excommunicated. Prince Henry’s
body was brought home, and buried in the monastery-church of Hayles in
Gloucestershire, where his father also was buried, as being the founder
of the monastery. Prince Henry’s heart was put into a golden cup, and
brought to the Abbey, where it was placed close to the Confessor’s
shrine,—some say, in the hand of a statue.

The shield of Richard Earl of Cornwall is carved on the Abbey walls, in
the spandrels of the beautiful arcade which runs round the interior of
the whole Church. It will be found in the South Aisle.

In the North Aisle, also in the arcade, is the shield of Simon de
Montfort, with its double-tailed lion. When we look at this shield, we
remember Simon de Montfort’s great work for his country, and how he
helped to form our English Parliament. But his name reminds us of
something else that happened in Southern France, and for which we feel
sorry. Simon’s father, Count Simon de Montfort, had a great deal to do
with the persecution of the Albigenses in 1209–1229, a cruel war which
was called the Albigensian Crusade. These terrible religious wars are
sad to think of, although, at the same time, it is interesting to find
this link between the Abbey and the history of other parts of Europe.

But it is time to come back to Edward the Confessor himself. If we want
to learn something about his character, and to understand why the people
loved him so much, we cannot do better than study the sculptures on the
screen behind the Coronation Chair. This delicately carved stone screen
was made about the time of Edward IV, and along the top of it is a row
of sculptures representing scenes from the life of the Confessor.

These scenes—beginning on the left hand as you face the screen—are as
follows:—

1. The nobles swearing to be loyal to Queen Emma, widow of Ethelred the
Unready, and mother of the Confessor.

2. Edward’s birth at Islip in Oxfordshire.

3. Edward’s Coronation at Winchester. The Archbishops of Canterbury and
York are represented standing on either side of the King.

4. The abolition of the Danegelt, or tax which Ethelred had made the
people pay in order to bribe the Danes to leave England. The carving
represents an old story which says that the Confessor saw a demon
dancing on the casks which held the money, and so he at once did away
with the tax.

5. This is a very curious story. A scullion, thinking that the King was
asleep, came into his room no less than three times to steal money out
of the treasure-chest. The third time the King startled him very much by
speaking. He did not scold him, however, but told him to make haste and
get away before Hugolin the Treasurer came. When Hugolin did come, he
was very angry with the King for letting the thief get off, but Edward
was very merciful, and perhaps remembered that it is sometimes a great
temptation to be very poor.

6. This picture shows the King kneeling in the old church at Thorney,
where he is said to have had a vision of our Lord, who appeared to him
as a child.

7. This represents a very curious, almost funny, story. One Whitsunday,
when the King was at church, his courtiers saw him laugh, just at a very
solemn part of the service too. They asked him afterwards why he had
behaved in such a strange way. He answered that he had seen the Danes
and Norwegians preparing to come and attack England, but as the Danish
King was going on board his ship he fell into the sea and was drowned.
This was what had made Edward laugh.

8. This represents a quarrel between Harold and Tosti, sons of Earl
Godwin, and brothers-in-law of the Confessor.

9. This is a vision, in which the Confessor saw that the Seven Sleepers
of Ephesus had all turned over from their right side to their left. This
meant that dreadful troubles and disasters were to come upon the world
for seventy years.

10, 12, and 13. These three pictures tell the beautiful story of the
pilgrim’s ring. One day the Confessor met a poor pilgrim who asked an
alms, and as the old book tells it, “the king is in distress because
neither gold nor silver he finds at hand. And he reflects, remains
silent, looks at his hand, and remembers that on his finder he had a
cherished ring, which was large, royal, and beautiful. To the poor man
he gives it, for the love of St. John his dear lord: and he takes it
with joy, and gently gives him thanks; and when he was possessed of it
he departed and vanished.”

Some time after, two English pilgrims from Ludlow were travelling in
Palestine, and they met an old man “white and hoary, brighter than the
sun at midday,” who showed them kindness and entertained them
hospitably. He told them that he was John the Evangelist, and that he
had a special love for the King of their country. He then gave them back
the ring, and bade them restore it to King Edward, who had given it to
him when he was disguised as a poor pilgrim. They were also to tell the
King that in six months’ time he would be with St. John in Paradise. The
pilgrims returned to England, and the thirteenth carving shows them
bringing back the ring and delivering the message, whereupon the King
began to prepare himself for his death.

These stories, together with others told of Edward’s kindness to the
sick and to the leper, show us the power of this simple goodness and
piety, and explain why the Confessor’s memory was so much loved and
revered.

His tomb has been the centre round which not only many of our Kings and
Queens, but gradually most of our best and greatest men, have been laid
to rest.

At the time of King Edward VII’s Coronation a covering, or “pall”, in
red velvet and gold was placed over the upper part of the Confessor’s
shrine, where it still remains. Round the edge of the pall is
embroidered a beautiful Latin inscription, which runs as follows—

“_Deo carus Rex Edwardus non mortuus est, sed cum XPO viaturus de morte
ad vitam migravit._”

“King Edward, dear to God, has not died, but has passed from death to
life, to live with Christ.”

[Illustration:

  [_G. A. Dunn._

  RICHARD II.
]




                               CHAPTER IV
   THE PLANTAGENETS OF THE DIRECT LINE FROM HENRY III TO RICHARD II,
                               1216–1399

         “_This England never did, nor never shall,
         Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
         But when it first did help to wound itself.
         Now these her princes are come home again,
         Come the three corners of the world in arms
         And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue
         If England to itself do rest but true._”
                                     SHAKSPEARE (_King John_).


A little more than two hundred years passed between the burial of the
Confessor in the Abbey and the burial of the next English King who rests
there, namely, Henry III. William the Conqueror is buried in the church
which he founded at Caen, in Normandy, and William Rufus, the “Red
King,” lies at Winchester, close to the New Forest, where he was shot by
Walter Tyrrell. Henry I was buried at Reading, and King Stephen at
Faversham. Henry II, the first King of the Plantagenet line, was buried
in the great Abbey of Fontevrault in Anjou, the ancestral home of the
Plantagenets. His eldest son, Henry, “the young King,” who rebelled
against him, is buried at Rouen, where the heart of Richard Cœur-de-Lion
also rests. Richard’s body is buried at Fontevrault, at his father’s
feet. The heart of King John was taken to Fontevrault in a golden cup,
but his body lies in Worcester Cathedral, between two Saxon saints,
Wulfstan and Oswald.

And now we come to the Plantagenets who are buried in the Abbey.

Henry III, as we have already seen, had a great love and reverence for
the memory of Edward the Confessor, and began the rebuilding of the
Abbey Church in his honour. It was no wonder, then, that he wished his
tomb to be close to the Confessor’s shrine.

Only three of our Kings have been married in the Abbey, and of these
Henry III was the first. He married Eleanor of Provence, one of four
sisters who all made remarkable marriages. Eleanor’s sister Margaret
married King Louis IX of France; her sister Sancha married Richard Earl
of Cornwall, and her sister Beatrice married Charles of Anjou, brother
of Louis IX of France, and afterwards King of Naples and Sicily. We are
reminded of this close connection between the royal houses of France and
England when we see on the Abbey walls the shield of Eleanor’s father,
Raymond Berengar, Count of Provence. When Henry III died in 1272 he was
buried, not where his tomb now is, but in front of the high altar, in
the grave where the Confessor’s body had first rested. The beautiful
tomb in the Confessor’s Chapel was not finished until 1291, Edward I
having brought from France the precious marbles and porphyry slabs for
its decoration. The tomb, like the Confessor’s, is of Italian design,
but the fine effigy is the work of an Englishman, William Torel.

When Henry’s body was at last placed there, his heart, according to an
old promise, was given in a golden cup to the Abbess of Fontevrault, who
was present at the ceremony. Like the heart of his father, King John, it
was to be taken back to the old Plantagenet home.

Thus began the circle of stately tombs which stand round the Confessor’s
shrine in that tall, silent, shadowy chapel, now often called the Chapel
of the Kings.

One thing to be remembered about the tombs of the Plantagenets is that
they actually hold the body of the sovereign, and are not just monuments
over a grave. In later days it became the fashion to bury in vaults.

Some years before Henry III’s death his beautiful little dumb daughter,
Katherine, was buried in a small tomb in the South Ambulatory, close to
St. Edmund’s Chapel. With her are buried two of her brothers who died
young, and four young children of King Edward I.

We have already heard about the heart of another Plantagenet, Prince
Henry d’Almayne, whose body, like that of his father, Richard Earl of
Cornwall, is buried at Hayles, in Gloucestershire.

On either side of Henry III are buried Edward I, and his wife, Eleanor
of Castile, daughter of Ferdinand III, King of Castile and Leon. Every
one remembers how Queen Eleanor went out with her husband to the
Crusades, and how she is said to have saved his life by sucking the
poison from his wound. Eleanor, the “Queen of good memory,” died in
Lincolnshire in 1290, and of the famous crosses which were put up at
each place where her body rested, three still remain, at Northampton,
Geddington, and Waltham. Queen Eleanor’s tomb is very beautiful, and so
is her effigy, which was made by the same English artist who made the
effigy of her father-in-law, King Henry III. The lower part of the tomb
is decorated with shields, and one of them is the shield of Castile and
Leon, with the castle and the lion upon it.

Edward I, the greatest soldier and lawgiver of all the Plantagenet
kings, died in 1307 at the little village of Burgh-on-the-Sands, on the
coast of Cumberland, when he was on his way to Scotland to try and crush
the rising of the Scots under Robert Bruce.

He is buried in a very plain, rough-looking tomb, and it is thought that
the tomb may have been left in an almost unfinished state in order that
it might be easily opened, for, as we know, Edward I wished his bones to
be carried at the head of the English army until Scotland was quite
conquered. He also desired that his heart should be sent to Holy Land,
where he had fought when he was young. But Edward II did not keep any of
the promises he made to his father, and was very unworthy of his great
name.

On Edward I’s tomb are some Latin words which mean, “Hammer of the
Scots,” and “Keep troth.”

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_

  TOMBS OF EDMUND AND AVELINE OF LANCASTER, AND OF AYMER DE VALENCE.
]

The tomb was opened in the year 1771, and an inner coffin of Purbeck
marble was found, in which the King’s body lay. He must have been a very
tall man, as, after all those centuries, he still measured 6 feet 2
inches. It is thus quite easy to understand why he was called
“Longshanks.” The body was dressed in a red dalmatic, and over it a
royal mantle of rich crimson satin, fastened with a splendid fibula or
clasp. On the head was a gilt crown; in the right hand was the sceptre
with the cross; in the left, the sceptre with the dove.

The coffin was afterwards securely closed, and has never been disturbed
again.

Next to the tomb of Edward I, and just beyond the screen which separates
the Chapel of the Kings from the Sacrarium, is the beautiful and highly
decorated tomb of his brother, Edmund Crouchback, first Earl of
Lancaster. He was the fourth son of Henry III, who named him after the
Anglo-Saxon martyr-King, St. Edmund of East Anglia. There is a chapel
dedicated to St. Edmund in the Abbey, and it was looked upon as coming
next in honour after the Chapel of the Confessor.

Edmund Crouchback was a crusader, like his brother, King Edward I, and
the cross or “crouch” he wore was probably the origin of his name,
although some people have thought that he was perhaps hump-backed.
Edmund and his first wife, the beautiful Aveline of Lancaster, were the
first bride and bridegroom to be married in Henry III’s new church. They
were married in 1269, but Aveline did not live very long. Her tomb is
quite near her husband’s, and is considered to be one of the finest in
the Abbey. Aveline was not only a great beauty, but also a great
heiress, and her wealth descended to the House of Lancaster. After
Aveline’s death, Edmund married Blanche, Queen of Navarre, a French
princess. She was a widow when Edmund married her, and her daughter Joan
afterwards married King Philip the Fair of France. Edmund and his second
wife lived for some time at Provins, in Champagne, and from that town
they brought to England the famous red roses which became the badge of
the House of Lancaster. These roses were said to have been brought from
the East by Crusaders. They still grow at Provins, and have a very sweet
scent.

Edmund Crouchback died at Bayonne in 1296, while he was fighting for the
English possessions in Gascony.

When Edmund was only eight years old, Pope Innocent II had given him the
title of King of Sicily and Apulia, but this was only an empty honour,
and meant that the English had to be heavily taxed in order to support
Edmund’s claim and satisfy the Pope. All these exactions of Henry III’s
helped to make the English more and more determined not to be taxed
without their consent, and had a great deal to do with the beginning of
the House of Commons in Simon de Montfort’s time.

Before passing on to the later descendants of Henry III, we must speak
of two very interesting tombs which recall some important things in
English history. These are, first, the tomb of William de Valence, in
St. Edmund’s Chapel; and secondly, the tomb of his son Aymer, which
stands in the Sacrarium, between the tombs of Edmund and Aveline of
Lancaster.

It will be remembered that Henry III’s mother, Isabella of Angoulême,
married again after King John’s death. She married the Count of La
Marche and Poitiers, who belonged to the Lusignan family,—a family which
was very well known in Europe, some of them being Kings of Cyprus and
Jerusalem. The children of Isabella and the Count de la Marche came over
to England, and the English people greatly disliked their insolence and
greediness, complaining that Henry III gave too many titles and too much
money to his French relations. William de Valence was the fourth son of
the Count de la Marche, and was the most disliked of all Henry’s
half-brothers. He was created Earl of Pembroke. He took an active part
in the Barons’ War, and was finally sent on the expedition into Gascony
with his nephew, Edmund Crouchback. Like Edmund, he died at Bayonne in
1296. His tomb is of French workmanship, and there are still some
remains of the famous Limoges enamel which decorated it.

Aymer de Valence, William’s son, succeeded his father as Earl of
Pembroke. He fought bravely in the Scottish wars, and was at the Battle
of Bannockburn in 1314. He was much blamed for his cruelty in having
Nigel Bruce hanged at the Castle of Kentire. Aymer died in France in
1324, very suddenly, and many people thought it was a punishment for
taking part in the condemnation and death of Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
son of Edmund Crouchback, who was revered as a saint. Aymer’s tomb is
celebrated for its beauty. It is very like Edmund Crouchback’s, with its
pinnacled canopy and niches for statues. Aymer is represented on the
canopy in full armour and riding his war-horse.

The three tombs of Edmund Crouchback, Aymer de Valence, and Aveline of
Lancaster are among the most beautiful in the Abbey, and are thought by
some people to be all three the work of one artist.

King Edward II, Edward of Carnarvon, as he was called from his
birthplace in Wales, is not buried in the Abbey, but at Gloucester, that
town being near Berkeley Castle, where he was murdered.

We are specially reminded of King Edward III in the Abbey, for not only
is he buried there, but the great sword and shield of state which were
carried before him during his wars with France are placed in the
Confessor’s Chapel, close to the Coronation Chair. This sword and shield
make us think of those famous Battles of Crécy and Poitiers, where
Edward III and the Black Prince fought.

Edward III is buried in a beautiful tomb just opposite to Henry III, and
his good Queen, Philippa of Hainault, is buried next to him, according
to her own wish. Her tomb was made by a Flemish artist, and was also a
very fine one, but, like many others in the Abbey, it has been sadly
destroyed. Queen Philippa is, of course, always remembered for having
begged for the lives of the brave citizens of Calais when the King had
ordered them to be hanged.

[Illustration:

  _Photo W. Rice, F.R.P.S._ _Allen & Co (London) Ltd Sc_

  _Tomb of Prince John of Eltham. in S. Edmund’s Chapel._
]

Close to Philippa lies her son, Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester,
murdered, it is to be feared, by order of his nephew, Richard II.

Eleanor de Bohun, widow of Thomas Duke of Gloucester, is buried in St.
Edmund’s Chapel, and the memorial brass on her tomb is the most
beautiful now left in the Abbey.

In St. Edmund’s Chapel is the tomb of another Plantagenet, Prince John
of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, brother of Edward III. He took his name
from the old palace at Eltham, where he was born. Prince John died quite
young, but he had already shown great promise as a soldier, and was
three times Regent of the kingdom when Edward III was away in France and
Scotland. He bears a shield with the lions of England and lilies of
France upon it. His mother was a French princess, daughter of King
Philip the Fair, and it was through her that Edward III thought he could
claim the throne of France. Close to the tomb of Prince John of Eltham
is the tiny tomb of two young children of Edward III, called, from their
birthplaces, William of Windsor and Blanche of the Tower.

Two grandchildren of Edward I, Hugh and Mary de Bohun, are buried in the
Chapel of St. Nicholas, another of the circle of chapels which crowns
the eastern end, or apse, of the Abbey. (St. Nicholas is the patron
saint of children.)

The Black Prince is buried in Canterbury Cathedral, close to where the
shrine of Thomas à Becket once stood, but his son, the unhappy Richard
II, had a great love for the Abbey, where he had not only been crowned,
but also married to his beloved first wife, Anne of Bohemia, who was a
descendant of the “Good King Wenceslas,” about whom we sing in the carol
for St. Stephen’s Day.

Richard II is buried in the Abbey, and the great tomb in which he and
Anne rest was made for her. Anne died in 1394, and her funeral was a
very splendid ceremony, hundreds of wax candles having been brought over
from Flanders to be lighted at the service. The tomb itself is very
magnificent; the gilt-bronze decorations and the robes of the effigies
are engraved with the leopards of England, the broomcods of the
Plantagenets, the ostrich feathers and lions of Bohemia, and the sun
rising through the clouds of Crécy. The ostrich feathers should remind
us of the crest and motto of the Prince of Wales.

Richard himself was not placed in this tomb until fourteen years after
his supposed murder, when his body was brought back from Friars’ Langley
by Henry V, in obedience to the wish of Henry IV. In the Sacrarium is a
beautiful portrait of Richard II, painted in his lifetime, and therefore
the oldest painting of any British sovereign. This portrait was very
carefully restored some years ago, and represents Richard in his crown
and royal robes, sitting in the Chair of State, very probably as he used
to appear in the Abbey on high festivals. Richard’s well-known badge of
the White Hart was painted on more than one part of the Abbey, and it is
interesting to see that, in old pictures of Richard, he and his
followers wear the badge of the White Hart. Many inns in England are
still called by this name.

With Richard II the direct Plantagenet line ends, and his is the last
tomb in the circle round the Confessor’s shrine.

Before speaking of the Plantagenet Houses of Lancaster and York we must
mention some of the chief men of this time who are buried in the Abbey.
First and foremost of these is the great poet, Geoffrey Chaucer, author
of the famous _Canterbury Tales_, and the father of English poetry.

He was born in 1328, the year after Edward III came to the throne, and
died in 1400, a year after Richard II. Chaucer lived in a house close to
the old Lady Chapel built by Henry III, and his house was one of those
pulled down in later days to make room for the larger Chapel of Henry
VII. Chaucer is buried in Poet’s Corner, and is the first of its
glorious circle of poets. His monument, which is quite near his grave,
was not put up until about 150 years after his death. Just above the
monument is a modern stained-glass window in Chaucer’s memory,
representing scenes from his life, and from the _Canterbury Tales_.

The only person not of royal blood who is buried in the Chapel of the
Kings is Richard’s great friend, John of Waltham, Bishop of Salisbury,
who was Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Great Seal, and Master of the
Rolls. He was the first statesman to be buried in the Abbey. In St.
Edmund’s Chapel are buried Ralph Waldeby, Archbishop of York, a friend
of the Black Prince and tutor to Richard II, and Sir Bernard Brocas, who
was renowned for his fighting in the Moorish wars. He died in 1400. His
son-in-law, Sir John Golofre, another great friend of Richard II, was
buried in the South Ambulatory in 1396. He was Richard’s ambassador in
France, and was buried in the Abbey by his master’s express command.

Our next chapter must be about those younger branches of the Plantagenet
family, the Houses of Lancaster and York, who also hold a place in the
Abbey.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  CHAUCER’S TOMB.
]




                               CHAPTER V
             THE HOUSES OF LANCASTER AND YORK: 1399 to 1485

        Plantagenet:

              “_Let him that is a true-born gentleman,
              And stands upon the honour of his birth,
              If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
              From off this briar pluck a white rose with me._”

        Somerset:

              “_Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
              But dare maintain the party of the truth,
              Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me._”
                    SHAKSPEARE (_King Henry VI_, part 1, ii, 4).


The name of Henry of Bolingbroke, son of John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, reminds us that Richard II had been made to resign his crown,
and that his cousin had been proclaimed King as King Henry IV. We think,
too, of that sad death, or murder, of the unhappy Richard at Pontefract
Castle. All these things, in one way or another, are connected with the
history of the Abbey. Henry IV is not buried in the Abbey, but in
Canterbury Cathedral, opposite the Black Prince, and, like him, near the
shrine of St. Thomas. But although Westminster is not his last
resting-place, Henry IV is connected with the Abbey in a very special
way.

The story is familiar to us in the pages of Shakspeare. The King had
intended to set out for Palestine on a pilgrimage or crusade, and he had
heard a prophecy that he should die at Jerusalem. Just before he was
going to start he came to the Abbey to pray at the Confessor’s shrine.
While he was in the Chapel he was seized with mortal illness, and was
carried into the famous “Jerusalem Chamber,” which was part of the
Abbot’s house. The Jerusalem Chamber had been built not long before, and
was probably the only room near with a proper fireplace in it. It was
cold March weather, and Henry was laid in front of the fire. When he
came to himself a little he asked what that room was, and being told its
name, he said: “Praise be to the Father of Heaven! for now I know that I
shall die in this chamber, according to the prophecy made of me
beforesaid, that I should die in Jerusalem.”

Every one will remember how an old historian tells us that afterwards,
when the young Prince Harry was watching by his father, he took the
crown and put it on his own head, thinking that his father was dead. The
King, however, was not dead, and, turning round, he reproached the
prince for his heartless and undutiful hurry in taking the crown. Prince
Harry was very much grieved, and explained why he had done such a thing.

After Henry IV’s death, Prince Harry, now King Henry V, spent all that
day at Westminster, in sorrow and penitence for his wild life in the
past. At night he went and confessed his sins to a holy hermit who lived
close to the Abbey, and the hermit assured him that he would be
forgiven. As we all know, Henry V became a religious and determined man,
and a great soldier,—“Conqueror of his enemies and of himself.” Henry V
was crowned in the Abbey on Passion Sunday, 1413, a cold, snowy day.

The wars in France soon began, and in 1415 a “Te Deum” was sung in the
Abbey for Henry’s great victory at Agincourt, and the King attended this
service in person.

Like his father, Henry V had a great wish to go to Holy Land and conquer
the Holy Sepulchre from the infidels, but while he was hoping for this
crusade, he was stricken with illness at Vincennes, and died in 1422,
when he was only thirty-four.

It is said that the people of both Rouen and Paris were most anxious
that Henry should be buried in their town, but the King had said clearly
in his will that he wished to be buried at Westminster, and he had
described most carefully what he wanted his Chantry Chapel to be like.

The funeral of Henry V was the most splendid ever seen in the Abbey. The
great procession began in Paris, and escorted the body to Calais. It
then came on from Dover to London. James I, King of Scots, headed the
procession as chief mourner, and the widowed Queen, Katherine de Valois,
followed it.

The King’s tomb stands at the extreme eastern end of the Abbey, and over
it, between the tombs of Queen Eleanor and Queen Philippa, rises the
famous Chantry Chapel, where prayers were to be offered up for ever.

Among the statues that adorn the Chantry are those of St. George, the
patron saint of England, and St. Denys, the patron saint of France.

On a bar above the Chantry are hung King Henry V’s shield, saddle, and
helmet, just as the Black Prince’s armour is hung above his tomb in
Canterbury Cathedral.

The tomb below was once very splendid with gold and silver, and the
figure of King Henry had a silver head. But in the reign of Henry VIII
these magnificent decorations were stolen, and the robbers even carried
off the silver head of the effigy. All that remains of the effigy is the
figure of plain English oak.

We come next to the pious and gentle King Henry VI, who was so much
loved by his people, in spite of all the misfortunes of his reign. It is
sad to think how all Henry V’s conquests in France were lost one by one,
although it was a good thing for England in the end. But there is one
glorious memory connected with the wars of Henry VI’s reign, a memory
which we all love and revere, whether we are French or English. That is
the memory of Joan of Arc, that pure and noble young French girl whose
faith and courage saved her country. When we stand in the Abbey and
remember the Lancastrian Kings, it is good for us also to think of her.

Henry VI always intended to be buried in the Abbey, and one day, when he
was there, some one suggested to him that his father’s tomb should be
moved to one side, and that his own should be placed beside it. But
Henry answered: “Nay, let him alone: he lieth like a noble prince. I
would not trouble him.” At last Henry VI chose a grave for himself close
to the Confessor’s shrine; the spot was all marked out, and indeed the
tomb itself was ordered. Then came the Wars of the Roses, the defeat of
the Lancastrian party, and the imprisonment of Henry VI in the Tower of
London in 1461. After his mysterious death ten years later, his body was
buried at Chertsey Abbey. Afterwards, in the reign of Richard III, it
was moved to St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, where it still rests.

The French princess, Katherine de Valois, wife of Henry V and mother of
Henry VI, is now buried in Henry V’s Chantry. It will be remembered that
her second husband was Owen Tudor, and that their son, Edmund Tudor, was
the father of King Henry VII. After Katherine married Owen Tudor she
seemed to be quite forgotten, but when she died she was buried with all
honour in the old Lady Chapel. While Henry VII’s new Lady Chapel was
being built, the coffin was placed beside Henry V’s tomb, and remained
there in a most neglected state for many long years. Then it was removed
to a vault in the Chapel of St. Nicholas, and finally it was moved, by
permission of Queen Victoria, into Henry V’s Chantry, where at last poor
Queen Katherine rests in peace.

In 1461, when Henry VI was deposed, a prince of the House of York,
Edward IV, came to the throne. He died at Westminster, and had a great
funeral service in the Abbey, but he is buried in St. George’s Chapel,
Windsor, like his cousin, Henry VI.

The earliest monument of the House of York in the Abbey is the tomb of
Philippa, Duchess of York, in the Chapel of St. Nicholas. She was the
wife of Edward, second Duke of York, grandson of Edward III, who was
killed at Agincourt. After his death, Philippa was made Lady of the Isle
of Wight.

King Richard III is buried at Leicester, and after him came the poor
little Edward V, who, with his brother, Richard Duke of York, was
murdered in the Tower. Their bones remained at the Tower until the reign
of Charles II, when they were found under a staircase. Charles II
commanded that they should be brought to the Abbey, and they are placed
in a tomb in Henry VII’s Chapel. Strangely enough, both these little
princes are closely connected with Westminster. In 1470, Queen Elizabeth
Woodville, wife of Edward IV, had taken refuge in the Sanctuary at
Westminster. Nobody could dare to hurt any one who had taken sanctuary,
and so the Queen felt she was safe in that time of war and trouble. Here
Edward V was born. He was baptized in the Abbey, and the Abbot of
Westminster was one of his godfathers.

Then later on, after Edward IV’s death, when Richard III was trying to
get the crown for himself, Elizabeth Woodville again took shelter in the
Sanctuary at Westminster, and brought her five daughters and her second
son, the little Richard Duke of York. Edward V was already in the Tower.
Richard III sent to Westminster, and insisted that his young nephew
should be allowed to join Edward in the Tower. He dared not take him out
of Sanctuary by force, but he made the Archbishop of Canterbury persuade
the poor Queen to let the boy go. She was dreadfully grieved, and tried
all she could to keep her son safely with her, but in vain. They parted
with tears, and she never saw him again.

A little daughter of Edward IV, Margaret Plantagenet, is buried in a
tiny tomb in the Confessor’s Chapel. In the Islip Chapel is the grave of
Anne Mowbray, daughter of the Duke of Norfolk. She was betrothed to
Richard Duke of York when they were both little children of only five
years old.

Anne Neville, the unhappy wife of Richard III, and daughter of Warwick
“the Kingmaker,” lies in a forgotten grave in the South Ambulatory.

We see, then, how much there is in the Abbey to remind us of the Houses
of Lancaster and York, and of the Wars of the Roses, besides the great
wars in France.

But further, we shall now find that it was becoming more and more the
custom for the famous men of the age to be buried in the Abbey.

Richard Courtney, Bishop of Norwich, a great friend of Henry V, is
buried there. He died just before the Battle of Agincourt, and was
nursed by the King in his last illness. In St. Paul’s Chapel is the fine
tomb of Ludovic Robsert, Lord Bourchier, who fought at Agincourt and was
afterwards made the King’s Standard Bearer. Sir Humphrey Bourchier, who
died fighting on the Yorkist side at the Battle of Barnet in 1471, is
buried in Edmund’s Chapel. Sir Thomas Vaughan, Treasurer to Edward IV
and Chamberlain to Edward V, is buried in the Chapel of St. John the
Baptist.

While speaking of this time in English history, we must not forget one
man who did a very great and important work in the world, and who was
very closely connected with the Abbey, although he is not actually
buried there. This was William Caxton, the first English printer. Caxton
belongs almost entirely to the Lancastrian and Yorkist times, as he was
born in 1410, during the reign of Henry IV, and died in 1491, in the
reign of Henry VII. About the year 1471 (the year in which Henry VI
died) Caxton came to live in Westminster. He set up his printing-press
in a house quite close to the Abbey, and there he worked for the last
twenty years of his life. It seems that the Abbot of Westminster was
greatly interested in Caxton and his work, and one of his great friends
and patrons was the Lady Margaret, mother of King Henry VII. Caxton
printed several books for her. Caxton is buried quite near the Abbey, in
St. Margaret’s Churchyard. There is a fine stained-glass window to his
memory in St. Margaret’s Church. Caxton stood on the threshhold of the
modern world, and, as we realise the great changes brought about in
human life by the art of printing, we may think of that window in St.
Margaret’s, where Caxton is represented holding his motto: “Fiat Lux”
(let there be light), while below are Tennyson’s beautiful lines:

        “Thy prayer was Light, more Light while time shall last,
          Thou sawest the glories growing on the night;
        But not the shadow which that light would cast
          Till shadows vanish in the Light of light.”

With this thought in our minds we will turn to the next period of
English history.




                               CHAPTER VI
                           THE HOUSE OF TUDOR

       “_Fair is our lot—O goodly is our heritage!
       (Humble ye, my people, and be fearful in your mirth!)
           For the Lord our God Most High
           He hath made the deep as dry,
     He hath smote for us a pathway to the ends of all the earth._”
                     RUDYARD KIPLING (_The Seven Seas_).


The famous House of Tudor, in which the Plantagenet lines of York and
Lancaster were united, is in many ways very closely connected with the
Abbey. All the Tudor sovereigns, except one, are buried in the Abbey.
But this is not all, for the Abbey and the School owe their present
establishment to Henry VIII and Queen Elizabeth, as we shall find later
on.

It was in the Tudor times that modern England really began, and most of
the great changes that took place in the Church and the nation at that
time are faithfully reflected in the Abbey history. We can read them
there, just as we can read the story of the Norman Conquest, of the
Conquest of Scotland, or of the French Wars.

We ought also to look beyond our own country, and remember what was
going on in other parts of the world. While the Tudors were reigning in
England, Christopher Columbus discovered America, and the Portuguese
navigator, Vasco de Gama, sailed round the Cape of Good Hope, thus
finding a new way to the East Indies. These two discoveries made a great
change in the history of the world, and some of the monuments in the
Abbey will speak to us of the difference which those discoveries made to
England.

When we speak of the Tudors we naturally think first of King Henry VII,
who built the beautiful chapel at the eastern end of the Abbey,
directing that it should be the burial-place of himself and his family.

The foundation of the Chapel has an interesting history connected with
the House of Lancaster. Through his mother, Margaret Beaufort, Henry VII
descended from John of Gaunt, and therefore from Edward III, and he was
very anxious that people should remember this. Partly for that reason,
he wanted very much to bring the body of Henry VI from Windsor, and to
bury it in the new, splendid chapel at Westminster. He also wished the
Pope to declare Henry VI to be a saint; and indeed, many people at that
time thought him to be so. However, it happened that the body of Henry
VI was never moved from Windsor after all, but there was at that time an
altar to his memory in Henry VII’s Chapel.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  MARGARET BEAUFORT, COUNTESS OF RICHMOND, AND MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.
]

The great gates and the sculptured ornament of the Chapel are in
themselves quite a lesson in English history. On the gates and on the
walls we see the famous Tudor Roses, which are the red and white roses
of Lancaster and York united. There is also the Portcullis of the
Beaufort Castle in Anjou, which castle had belonged to Edmund
Crouchback, and descended through him to John of Gaunt. Again, we see
the crown caught in a bush on Bosworth Field, and two Yorkist badges,
the Rose in the Sun, and the Falcon on the Fetterlock. On the gates,
too, we find the daisy or “Marguérite,” the name-flower of Henry VII’s
mother, the Lady Margaret. Last, but not least, we find the Red Dragon
of the last British King, Cadwallader, from whom Henry VII claimed to
descend, reminding us that the Tudors boasted of descent from the
ancient British stock,—from King Arthur and Llewellyn. Round the Chapel,
in the graceful little niches that adorn the walls, are statues of
angels and saints. Among them are the Apostles, some of the martyrs, and
also the royal saints of Britain, St. Edward, St. Edmund, St. Oswald,
and St. Margaret of Scotland.

The first person to be buried in Henry VII’s Chapel was his wife,
Elizabeth of York, daughter of Edward IV. She died in 1503, and was
first buried in one of the side Chapels, until her husband’s new Chapel
was ready.

In 1509, Henry VII died, and was buried in the middle of the nave of his
Chapel. The funeral ceremony was very splendid, and over his grave rises
one of the most magnificent tombs in the whole Abbey. The monument
itself was made by the great Florentine sculptor, Torrigiano, who was a
fellow-student and rival of Michael Angelo. We are told that Torrigiano
broke Michael Angelo’s nose in a fight they had at Florence. At any
rate, he knew how to design a beautiful monument.

The bronze screen round the tomb is of English work and Gothic design,
and is in quite a different style from the Italian Renaissance tomb
within.

Three months afterwards, Henry’s mother, Margaret Beaufort, Countess of
Richmond and Derby, died, and was buried in the South Aisle of her son’s
Chapel. She died just at the time of the rejoicings for the Coronation
of her grandson, Henry VIII, and of Catherine of Aragon. The “Lady
Margaret” was greatly honoured and beloved. She was a patroness of
learning, and founded two colleges at Cambridge, and Professorships of
Divinity at both Oxford and Cambridge. She was also a good friend to
William Caxton the printer, as we have already heard. Her tomb was made
by the same Florentine artist, Torrigiano, and is most beautiful. The
effigy represents the Lady Margaret in her widow’s dress, her hands
uplifted in prayer. The epitaph round the edge of the monument was
written by the great Erasmus, who was a friend of Lady Margaret’s, and
who was one of the earliest Lady Margaret Professors of Divinity at
Cambridge, Bishop John Fisher being the first.

Another of the family, Owen Tudor, uncle of Henry VII, took refuge in
the Sanctuary at Westminster during the Civil Wars, and became a monk.
He is buried in the South Transept. A little daughter of Henry VII,
Elizabeth Tudor, is buried in a tiny tomb in the Confessor’s Chapel,
close to Henry III. A little son, Edward, is also buried in the Abbey.
Henry VIII had intended to be buried at Westminster with his first wife,
Catherine of Aragon, to whom he was married in the Abbey. Indeed, he had
actually ordered Torrigiano to make the effigies for the tomb. But, as
we know, everything changed, and Henry VIII is buried in St. George’s,
Windsor, with his third wife, Jane Seymour, mother of King Edward VI.

Anne of Cleves is the only one of Henry’s six wives who is buried in the
Abbey. Her grave is in the South Ambulatory, and she has a large and
rather ugly monument in the Sacrarium, just opposite to the tomb of
Aymer de Valence. Anne of Cleves died at Chelsea in 1557.

One great name of Tudor times, that of Cardinal Wolsey, is brought back
to us when we remember that in 1515 his Cardinal’s hat arrived from
Rome, and was received with great pomp at the Abbey. A stately service
was held; the Archbishop of Canterbury set the hat on Wolsey’s head, and
a “Te Deum” was sung. Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon, and Henry’s
sister Mary, the French Queen, were present at the ceremony.

The boy King, Edward VI, is buried close to his grandfather, Henry VII.
He was buried by Archbishop Cranmer, who was his godfather, and who had
baptized and crowned him. Edward VI has no monument, but the altar of
the chapel stands over his grave. The original altar was the work of
Torrigiano, and must have been very beautiful. It was destroyed in the
time of the Commonwealth, but parts of it have been found and are used
in the present altar. The cross on this altar has a special interest for
us all, because it was given to the Abbey by Ras Makonnen, the
Abyssinian envoy, at the time of King Edward VII’s serious illness, when
the Coronation had to be put off. The cross is of a very ancient
pattern, and there is an Ethiopian inscription upon it.

Not far from the grave of Edward VI there stood for many years a
pulpit—now in the Nave—from which it is believed Archbishop Cranmer
preached at the Coronation and funeral of his royal godson, Edward VI,
in 1553.

In the north aisle of Henry VII’s Chapel the two Tudor Queens, Mary and
Elizabeth, are buried. Poor Queen Mary had taken much care for the
Abbey. During the reigns of Henry VIII and Edward VI great changes had
been made there; the monks had been sent away, and, unfortunately, many
of the precious and beautiful things that belonged to the church and
monastery had been removed or destroyed. It was even said that Protector
Somerset wanted to pull down the Abbey itself. Queen Mary brought the
monks back, with Abbot Feckenham to rule over them; she restored the
Confessor’s shrine, and had the church and the services arranged again
as they had been in the old days before the Reformation.

After her short, unhappy reign, Mary Tudor was laid to rest in her
grandfather’s chapel. No monument was erected to her, and it is sad to
think that very few of her subjects mourned for her. We are told that
when the various altars in the chapel were taken down, the stones were
piled up over her grave. Perhaps it was intended to make them into a
monument later on. Another forty-five years passed, and then, in 1603,
Queen Elizabeth died, to the great grief of all her people, whose
lamentations followed her to her grave in the Abbey. She rests there, in
the same vault as her sister Mary, the vault being so narrow that Queen
Elizabeth’s coffin had to be placed on the top of Queen Mary’s. The
monument, which is a fine one of its kind, is to Queen Elizabeth alone,
and was erected to her memory by her cousin and successor, King James I.
The epitaph on the western end of the monument mentions both the Tudor
sister-queens, and runs as follows: “Consorts both in throne and grave,
here rest we two sisters, Elizabeth and Mary, in the hope of the
resurrection.”

It is now time to speak of some other famous people who belonged to the
Tudor times, and who are buried in the Abbey. Among these are the
following:—

Sir Humphrey Stanley, who fought on Henry VII’s side at Bosworth, and
was knighted by him after the battle. Sir Humphrey died in 1505, and is
buried in the Chapel at St. Nicholas.

Sir Giles Daubeny and his wife, who are buried in St Paul’s Chapel. Sir
Giles Daubeny was Lord Lieutenant of Calais in Henry VII’s time, when
Calais still belonged to England. He died in 1508.

Then come some of the great ladies of the Tudor Court, namely:

Frances Grey, Duchess of Suffolk, granddaughter of Henry VII and mother
of the unfortunate Lady Jane Grey, who, as every one remembers, was
Queen of England for twelve days after the death of Edward VI. The
Duchess is buried in St. Edmund’s Chapel, close to some of the
Plantagenets, and on the spot where the altar used to stand.

Anne Seymour, the wife of Protector Somerset, is buried in the Chapel of
St. Nicholas. She was sister-in-law to Queen Jane Seymour, mother of
Edward VI. From what is told us about her she seems to have been both
very clever and very fierce-tempered, and to have made people afraid of
her. She lived on into the days of Elizabeth, and died in 1587, aged
ninety.

In the same chapel is a tablet in memory of Jane Seymour, daughter of
Protector Somerset. She was cousin to Edward VI, and it had been
intended that he should marry her.

Another name of interest is that of Frances Howard, Countess of
Hertford, sister of the Lord Howard of Effingham who defeated the
Spanish Armada. She is buried in St. Benedict’s Chapel.

In St. Paul’s Chapel are the grave and monument of Frances Sidney,
Countess of Sussex. She was the aunt of the famous Sir Philip Sidney,
the soldier and poet. This lady was the foundress of Sidney Sussex
College at Cambridge, which is called after her.

In the Chapel of St. John the Baptist is the enormous
monument—thirty-six feet high—of Henry Cary, Lord Hunsdon, who died in
1596. His mother was a sister of Queen Anne Boleyn, and thus he was
Queen Elizabeth’s first cousin. He was Lord Chamberlain to Queen
Elizabeth, and was always a most devoted servant and friend to her. He
had special charge of the Queen at the time of the Spanish Armada. It is
said that he died partly of disappointment at having to wait a long time
before Queen Elizabeth would make him Earl of Wiltshire. When he was
dying the Queen came to see him, and, having brought the patent for the
earldom and the robes, she had them put down on his bed. But Lord
Hunsdon said to her: “Madam, seeing you counted me not worthy of this
honour whilst I was living, I count myself unworthy of it now I am
dying.”

In the Chapel of St. Nicholas are buried the wife and daughter of the
great Lord Burleigh, Mildred, Lady Burleigh, and Anne, Countess of
Oxford. Lord Burleigh’s own funeral service took place in the Abbey, but
he is buried at Stamford. On the monument to his wife and daughter is a
figure of Lord Burleigh himself, kneeling, “his eyes dim with tears for
the loss of those who were dear to him beyond the whole race of
womankind.” One of the figures on the tomb is that of Robert Cecil,
first Earl of Salisbury, and this is especially interesting when we
think of the monument to the Lord Salisbury of our own day (also a
Robert Cecil) which has just been placed in the Abbey, close to the
Great West Door.

Several other members of the Cecil family are buried in the Abbey, one
of the chief among them being Thomas Cecil, first Earl of Exeter.

Two of the famous lawyers of the time buried in the Abbey are Sir Thomas
Bromley and Sir John Puckering. Sir Thomas Bromley, who is buried in the
Chapel of St. Paul, succeeded Sir Nicholas Bacon as Lord Keeper, and was
the chief judge at the trial of Mary, Queen of Scots. Sir John
Puckering, who is buried in the same chapel, had also to do with the
trials both of Mary and of her secretary, Davison.

Some of Queen Elizabeth’s great soldiers rest in the Abbey. First among
these we will mention Sir Francis Vere, who fought in the Flemish Wars
and commanded the forces in the Netherlands. His monument, in the Chapel
of St. John the Evangelist, is celebrated for its beauty. It is said to
be copied from the tomb of Count Engelbrecht II of Nassau in the church
at Breda.

Others of the Vere family are buried near Sir Francis. Close to this
monument is that of George Holles, who fought in the same wars. Another
young soldier of the same family, Francis Holles, is buried in St.
Edmund’s Chapel. Both their monuments are interesting, because the
statue of Sir George Holles is the first standing figure put up in the
Abbey, and that of Francis one of the earliest sitting figures. And
besides this, the statue of Sir George Holles is the first represented
in Roman armour, instead of in the costume of the time.

The fashion of monuments changed a good deal in the Elizabethan days. In
older times people were always represented lying down, with their hands
clasped in prayer, like the figures of the Plantagenets, for instance.
But the statues on the Elizabethan tombs represent people leaning upon
their elbows, or sitting, or standing. We shall see that, later on, they
are not content even with that, but wave their arms aloft, as if talking
to a crowd of people.

Another very fine Elizabethan tomb is that of Lord and Lady Norris, who
were great friends of Queen Elizabeth. This huge erection is in the
Chapel of St. Andrew, not far from the monument of Sir Francis Vere. The
kneeling figures round the tomb represent the six sons of Lord and Lady
Norris, who were all fine, brave soldiers, and fought in the Netherlands
and elsewhere.

But besides soldiers, lawyers, and great ladies, there are other
Elizabethan names connected with the Abbey—three of these names more
famous than any we have yet mentioned. These three are Edmund Spenser,
William Shakspeare and Sir Walter Raleigh. It is true that the two last
of these great men lived on some time after the death of Queen
Elizabeth, but as they always seem to belong more to her reign than to
any other, we will speak of them now, after Spenser. Edmund Spenser,
author of the _Faërie Queen_, died in Westminster, and is buried in
Poets’ Corner. A very plain monument marks the spot, but the epitaph is
a beautiful one: “Here lyes, expecting the second comminge of our
Saviour Christ Jesus, the body of Edmond Spenser, the Prince of Poets in
his tyme, whose divine spirrit needs noe othir witnesse then the workes
he left behinde him.”

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  SHAKSPEARE’S MONUMENT.
]

It is said that when Spenser was buried the poets who were present threw
their elegies and their pens into the grave. Probably, then,
Shakspeare’s pen is lying there, on Spenser’s coffin.

Then we come to Shakspeare himself,—the poet who is the glory of the
English race, and famous throughout the whole of the civilised world.
Shakspeare, as we know, is not buried in the Abbey, but in the Parish
Church of his native town, Stratford-on-Avon. The monument in the Abbey
was not put up until long years after his death. On it are the famous
lines from _The Tempest_—

            “The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
            The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
            Yea, all which it inherits, shall dissolve;
            And, like this unsubstantial pageant faded,
            Leave not a rack behind.”

The connexion of Sir Walter Raleigh with the Abbey is not so direct,
because he is not buried there, but in St. Margaret’s, close by.
However, Raleigh was imprisoned in the old Gatehouse of the monastery
the night before his execution, and the Dean of Westminster went to see
him, and to pray with him. During that last night of his life Sir Walter
Raleigh, after the final parting with his wife, wrote the following
well-known lines on the blank leaf of his Bible—

                  “Ev’n such is Time, that takes on trust
                  Our youth, our joys, our all we have,
                  And pays us but with age and dust;
                  Who in the dark and silent grave
                  When we have wander’d all our ways,
                  Shuts up the story of our days.
              But from this earth, this grave, this dust,
              The Lord shall raise me up, I trust.”

As the colony of Virginia was first founded by Sir Walter Raleigh, his
name will always remind us of the beginning of our great Colonial
Empire. In St. Margaret’s Church there is a very fine window to
Raleigh’s memory. This was given by some citizens of America, and the
scenes in the window commemorate the founding of the New World.

One of the chief and earliest promoters of the Virginia Company was the
brave soldier, Sir John Ogle, who fought in the Netherlands under Sir
Francis Vere, and is buried in the Abbey. No inscription marks his
grave.

Somewhere in the Abbey is buried another promoter of the South Virginia
Company, Richard Hakluyt, author of a book of _Voyages and Travels_.
Hakluyt was a Westminster scholar. He became a clergyman, and was
Prebendary and Archdeacon of Westminster. In the first volume of his
_Voyages and Travels_ is a description of the defeat of the Spanish
Armada.

Two more Elizabethan monuments may be mentioned before we leave the
Tudor times altogether. One is the monument to William Camden, the
famous antiquary, who was Head-Master of Westminster School in Queen
Elizabeth’s time. He is buried in the South Transept, and his monument
stands against its western wall. Camden, like Shakspeare, lived on into
the Stuart time, but he seems to belong more especially to Elizabethan
days.

The other monument is perhaps more curious than actually interesting. It
is that of Elizabeth Russell, goddaughter of Queen Elizabeth, and
daughter of a Lord Russell who is buried in the Chapel of St. Nicholas.
Elizabeth Russell was born in the Abbey precincts, where her mother had
taken refuge from the plague. She had a very grand christening in the
Abbey, and the Earl of Leicester stood as godfather. She died young, and
was buried in St. Edmund’s Chapel, where her monument represents her
sitting in an osier chair. This is the first sitting figure in the
Abbey. A curious old story says that Elizabeth Russell died from the
prick of a needle, and people added to the story by saying that she had
been working on Sunday! Most likely the idea arose because her finger
points to a skull at her feet.

We have spoken of Queen Elizabeth’s having established the Abbey as a
Collegiate Church, and those who are interested in Westminster may like
to know that the first Deans of her time are buried in St. Benedict’s
Chapel. These were Dean William Bill and Dean Gabriel Goodman. It was
under their rule that the Abbey services were arranged much in their
present form.

We have now recalled the chief memories of the Tudor days, so far as
that great chapter in English history is recorded in the Abbey.




                              CHAPTER VII
                THE HOUSE OF STUART AND THE COMMONWEALTH

           “_The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
           And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
           Lest one good custom should corrupt the world._”
                         TENNYSON (_The Passing of Arthur_).


From the Tudors and the great people of their reigns we pass on to the
House of Stuart, to the troubles of the great Civil War, and to the
Restoration of the Stuarts in 1661.

The Abbey history at this time helps us to realise that it was an age of
struggle between liberty and despotism, an age when the people were
determined to become more and more self-governing. The Tudors had been
clever enough and strong enough to rule without making their people
discontented. The Stuarts were not wise enough to see that the English
spirit of independence would not bear any tyrannical form of government,
and as the Stuarts found it difficult to understand this, they ended by
losing their kingdom altogether. We shall see how all these things left
their mark upon the Abbey itself.

As this chapter has to do with a long and eventful time in English
history, it will be divided into three parts. The first part will be
about the earlier Stuarts; the second, about the Commonwealth; and the
third, about the Stuart Restoration and the most famous men of the
Stuart and Commonwealth times.


                                   I

The first of the Stuart family to be laid to rest in the Abbey was
Margaret, Countess of Lennox, the mother of Lord Darnley. Margaret was
the daughter of the Earl of Angus and of Margaret Tudor, daughter of
Henry VII. Her epitaph tells us that she “had to her great-grandfather,
King Edward IV; to her grandfather, King Henry VII; to her uncle, King
Henry VIII; to her cousin-german, King Edward VI; to her brother, King
James V of Scotland; to her son (Darnley), King Henry I of Scotland; to
her grandchild, King James VI (of Scotland) and I (of England).” This
epitaph is again an English history lesson in itself, if we think over
it carefully. Margaret’s mother was first married to King James IV of
Scotland, and on his death she married the Earl of Angus. Margaret
Lennox was thus half-sister to James V of Scotland, and she therefore
was a link between the English and Scottish royal houses. She married
Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox. Her eldest son, Lord Darnley, married
Mary, Queen of Scots, and was called King. Her second son was Charles
Stuart, father of the Lady Arabella, of whom we hear so much in the
reigns of Elizabeth and James I. Margaret died in 1578, and is buried in
the south aisle of Henry VII’s Chapel, where she has a very fine tomb.
Round the tomb are the kneeling figures of her children, Lord Darnley
and Charles Stuart among them. Lord Darnley is represented wearing a
royal robe, and there are the broken remains of a crown over his head.
Charles Stuart is buried here with his mother.

The chief and most interesting Stuart monument in the Abbey is that of
Mary, Queen of Scots. This monument is also in the south aisle of Henry
VII’s Chapel, and stands above the great Stuart vault, where so many of
the Stuart family rest. After Mary’s execution at Fotheringay in 1587,
Queen Elizabeth ordered her body to be solemnly buried in Peterborough
Cathedral. But when James I came to the throne he commanded that his
mother’s remains should be brought to Westminster, and buried in the
Abbey. He also said that she was to have a monument equal to that of her
cousin, Queen Elizabeth, and that the same honour should be paid to her.
A copy of the warrant of James I for the removal of his mother’s body
hangs on the wall near her tomb. Queen Mary was buried at Westminster in
1612, and the splendid monument we now see was erected to her. It is
very like Queen Elizabeth’s, only larger and more costly. Her tomb in
the Abbey was at one time almost a place of pilgrimage.

In 1607, two little princesses, Mary and Sophia, daughters of James I,
died, and were buried near Queen Elizabeth, in the north aisle of Henry
VII’s Chapel. Their tombs are also close to the spot where the bones of
Edward V and Richard Duke of York were afterwards placed. Dean Stanley
used to call this corner of Henry VII’s Chapel “Innocents’ Corner,”
because these four children are buried here. Princess Mary was the first
of James I’s children born in England, and was therefore the first
“Princess of Great Britain.” She was only two and a half years old when
she died, and seemed to be wonderfully quick of understanding. When she
was dying she kept saying: “I go, I go, away I go.”

The baby Princess Sophia, named after her grandmother, the Queen of
Denmark, is buried in her pretty cradle-tomb, which is one of the best
known in the Abbey. A few years later the eldest brother of these two
little girls, Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales, died, and was buried in
the same vault as his grandmother, Mary, Queen of Scots. There was great
grief in the country at the death of this promising young prince, who
was especially the hope of the Puritan party.

Arabella Stuart, who had such a troubled life, and who was always being
suspected of wishing and trying to be made Queen of England, died in
1615, and was buried in the great Stuart vault. Her coffin was placed on
the top of the coffin of Mary, Queen of Scots.

Queen Anne of Denmark, wife of James I, died in 1619, and is buried in
the central aisle of Henry VII’s Chapel, not far from the tomb of Henry
VII himself.

King James the First, who died in 1625, is not buried with any of his
own Stuart family, but in the great Tudor vault where Henry VII and
Elizabeth of York lie. It is supposed that James wished this because the
Stuarts claimed the English throne through the House of Tudor. When we
think of these two Kings, one really a Welshman and the other a
Scotchman, we remember that it was at James I’s succession that the
Scottish crown was united to that of England and Wales. The United
Kingdom may be said to have been begun then, although the actual formal
union did not take place till long afterwards.

We should also remember that our Colonial Empire really began in James
I’s reign. Sir Walter Raleigh’s settlement in Virginia had indeed been
given up, but in 1607 and 1610, settlements were again made in Virginia
and also in Newfoundland. And more important still, it was in James I’s
reign that the celebrated “Pilgrim Fathers” sailed from Plymouth in the
_Mayflower_ and crossed to America. They landed in Massachusetts Bay,
and called their first settlement New Plymouth.

In 1629, the infant Prince Charles, eldest child of Charles I, was
buried in the Stuart vault, and in 1640, another child of Charles I, the
little Princess Anne, was laid there also. Soon after her funeral, the
troublous days began, and it was not long before the Abbey passed into
Cromwell’s hands.


                                   II

We must now turn to think of a very different state of things and of
very different people, namely, the Parliamentarian Government and the
great men of the Commonwealth. Between the years 1653 and 1660 the
Parliamentarian Party made great changes in the government and services
of the Abbey, and the Presbyterian form of worship was established.
Again, as at the time of Henry VIII, various ornaments and other
possessions of the church were removed and sold.

Archbishop Laud, one of the chief advisors of Charles I, and a great
enemy of the Puritans, was at one time Prebendary of Westminster, and
had great influence and authority in the Abbey while he was one of the
Chapter. In his old age Archbishop Laud was imprisoned for three years,
and, sad to say, he was finally executed by order of the Long
Parliament.

Many of the famous Parliamentary soldiers and statesmen were buried in
the Abbey, as they most of them certainly deserved to be. Whether we
like all they did or not, we grieve to think that the bones of these
great Englishmen were nearly all taken out of their graves at the time
of the Stuart Restoration, and buried in a large pit outside the Abbey
walls. To us it seems a mean and unworthy revenge, but perhaps we can
hardly understand how angry the Royalists were.

We see, however, that from this time onward it was no longer thought
necessary that people must be of royal or noble birth in order to
deserve a grave in the Abbey. Any man who had done any especial service
to his country and nation, whether in peace or war, was henceforward
thought worthy of a place there, and this is just what helps to make the
Abbey one of the most interesting places in the world.

The chief man of the Parliamentary party to be buried in the Abbey was,
of course, Oliver Cromwell himself. He died in 1658, and was buried in
Henry VII’s Chapel. Although he was only called Lord Protector, his
funeral was very stately, like that of a sovereign. It seems to us a
curious thing that Cromwell should have wished that he and his family
should be buried in this Chapel, among the royal Tudors and Stuarts, but
so it was.

Henry Ireton, son-in-law of Cromwell, and deputy for the Protector in
Ireland, died in 1651, and was buried in the Cromwell vault in Henry
VII’s Chapel.

John Bradshaw, President of the Council that condemned Charles I to
death, died in 1659, and was also buried in the Cromwell vault. Bradshaw
had lived for some time at Westminster, the Deanery having been leased
to him. An old story says that his ghost used to haunt part of the
Triforium.

These three men, Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, were always looked upon
as the chief regicides, and at the Restoration their bodies were not
only dug up, but they were hanged at Tyburn and buried beneath the
gallows. The heads were struck off by the executioner, and put up on
poles outside Westminster Hall.

Among other well-known names of the Commonwealth times are John Pym and
William Strode, who are buried close to one another in the North
Ambulatory. Pym was the famous leader of the popular party in the Long
Parliament. He died in 1643. Strode was one of the five members whom
Charles I demanded to have given up to him when he came to the House of
Commons with an armed force in 1641–42.

Another celebrated name is that of Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, the
great commander of the Parliamentary army. Essex was the son of Queen
Elizabeth’s favourite, that Earl of Essex whose death made her last days
so miserable. This younger Essex died in 1646, and was buried in the
Chapel of St. John the Baptist. He had a very splendid funeral, at which
his effigy was carried, dressed in his General’s uniform. After the
funeral some Royalists broke into the Abbey, stripped the uniform off
the effigy, and broke it in revenge for what they considered to be
Essex’s treachery. At the Restoration his coffin was not found, so he
was fortunately left undisturbed in his grave.

In the same Chapel is buried another great soldier of the time, Colonel
Popham, who distinguished himself both on land and sea. His body was
allowed to remain in the Abbey, but the inscription was effaced. Popham
died in 1651.

Yet another great name is that of Admiral Robert Blake, the first of our
naval heroes to be buried in the Abbey. It was Blake who defeated the
Dutch Admiral, Van Tromp, off Dungeness in 1652. Five years later he
destroyed the Spanish West-Indian fleet off Santa Cruz. Blake died on
board his flagship, the _George_, just before arriving at Plymouth after
this last victory. He was buried with great solemnity in Henry VII’s
Chapel. Blake was re-interred on the north side of the Abbey in 1661,
and a window and brass tablet have been erected to his memory in St.
Margaret’s Church.

Sir William Constable, once Governor of Gloucester, and one of the men
who had signed Charles I’s death-warrant, was buried in the Cromwell
vault, as was also Sir Humphrey Mackworth, who had taken Ludlow Castle
from the Royalists and was afterwards Governor of Shrewsbury. Colonel
Richard Deane, the companion of Blake and Popham, is buried here, and
General Worsley, commander of the soldiers who turned out the Long
Parliament, lies in a grave not far from the Cromwell vault.

Several of Cromwell’s family were buried in this same Cromwell vault,
but the bodies were all taken out at the time of the Restoration except
that of his favourite daughter, Elizabeth Claypole, who is buried in a
different place, on the north side of Henry VII’s tomb, and whose
remains were thus left in peace.

[Illustration:

  _Photo W. Rice, F.R.P.S._ _Allen & Co (London) Ltd Sc_

  _Henry VII Chapel._
  _Tomb of the Founder._
]


                                  III

We now come to the time of the Restoration, and must think of the rest
of the Stuart family who are buried at Westminster.

King Charles I had been buried in St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, and
although there had been much talk of moving his body into a splendid
tomb in Henry VII’s Chapel, this was never done, and Charles I, like
Henry VI, still rests at Windsor.

The first Stuart to be buried in the Abbey after the Restoration was
Henry of Oatlands, Duke of Gloucester, son of Charles I. It was Henry
who, when he was a little boy, promised his father that he would be torn
in pieces before he would let himself be made King instead of either of
his elder brothers, Charles or James. He died in 1660, to the great
grief of Charles II, who had a very special love for him.

Then came a daughter of Charles I, Mary, Princess of Orange, mother of
King William III. She also died in 1660. Very soon afterwards,
Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, daughter of James I, died, and was buried
in the great Stuart vault. She is very closely connected with the later
history of England, because her daughter Sophia, who married the Elector
of Hanover, was the mother of King George I, and therefore Elizabeth was
direct ancestress of King Edward VII. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice,
who fought in the great Civil War, were sons of Elizabeth, and Prince
Rupert is buried here beside his mother.

King James II, who died in France in the year 1701, was first buried in
the Chapel of the English Benedictines in Paris. It was hoped that his
body would at last be brought to Westminster to be buried near the
graves of the other Kings of England. But this never happened, and James
II was finally buried in the Church of St. Germains, near Paris. His
first wife, Anne Hyde, daughter of Lord Clarendon, and mother of the two
Stuart Queens, Mary and Anne, died in 1671, and is buried in the Abbey,
in the vault where Mary, Queen of Scots, rests. Many children of James
II are buried there also. But the son of his second wife, Mary of
Modena, the Prince James whom many people thought the rightful successor
to the throne, is buried in another great St. Peter’s—St. Peter’s at
Rome. Not only is James—the Chevalier de St. George, as he was
called—buried in St. Peter’s, but also his wife and his two sons,
Charles Edward (Prince Charlie) and Henry Benedict, Cardinal of York.
With the Cardinal of York the male line of James II ended, and we go
back to his two daughters, Mary and Anne.

William III and Mary II are both buried in the Abbey, near the other
Stuarts. Queen Mary’s funeral was a very solemn and mournful one, and
she was much lamented by her subjects.

Queen Anne and her husband, Prince George of Denmark, are buried close
by, and Queen Anne’s eighteen infant children are buried in the great
Stuart vault under the monument of Mary, Queen of Scots. Only one of
Queen Anne’s children lived for any time, and that was William, Duke of
Gloucester, who died in 1700, aged eleven, “of a fever occasioned by
excessive dancing on his birthday.”

There are a few other relations of the Stuart family buried in the
Abbey, but with Queen Anne the Stuart history really ends so far as the
Abbey is concerned. None of the Stuart Kings have any monuments.

We must now call to mind some of the chief men of the Stuart times whose
graves are at Westminster. The greatest contemporaries of James I, Lord
Bacon and Shakspeare, are not buried in the Abbey. Lord Bacon is buried
at Verulam; and although Shakspeare has a monument in the Abbey, he is
not buried there, but, by his own desire, at his own native Stratford.

When we think of the reigns of James I and Charles I, we often recall
the name of a man who was a great friend and favourite of both these
Kings. This man is George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, whom James I
used to call by the silly name of “Steenie.” While we speak of
Buckingham, we remember that he had a great deal to do with preventing
Charles I’s marriage to a Spanish Infanta, and with bringing about his
marriage with Henrietta Maria of France. We also think of Buckingham’s
unsuccessful attempts to relieve La Rochelle, where the Huguenots were
besieged by Cardinal Richelieu, and in this way the French history of
that time seems to be brought very close to the Abbey.

As everyone knows, the Duke of Buckingham was murdered at Portsmouth in
1628, and he was buried in great state in Henry VII’s Chapel, where a
splendid monument was erected to him. Several of the Duke’s family are
buried in the same vault, and among them a young son, Francis, who was
killed in the Civil Wars, at the Battle of Kingston.

Sir George Villiers and his wife, the father and mother of the Duke of
Buckingham, are buried beneath a large monument in the Chapel of St.
Nicholas. It is said that the last meeting between the Duke of
Buckingham and his mother was a very sad and troubled one, as they had
both received a mysterious warning that some terrible thing was going to
happen to the Duke. When the Duke was murdered six months afterwards,
his mother appeared quite calm, as if she had been prepared to hear the
dreadful news.

Dudley Carleton and Lord Cottington, two men who held important offices
under the Stuarts, are buried in St. Paul’s Chapel. Dudley Carleton was
educated at Westminster School, and became first Secretary of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs. He was actually with the Duke of
Buckingham when he was assassinated, and saw the murder. It was Carleton
who saved the murderer, Felton, from being torn in pieces by the angry
soldiers.

Lord Cottington was an able and accomplished man. He was ambassador in
Spain under James I, Charles I, and again under Charles II.

Another well-known name of that time is that of Sir Thomas Richardson,
who was Lord Chief Justice in the time of Charles I. It was Sir Thomas
Richardson who had to tell Charles I that torture was illegal, when the
King wished to use it after the death of Buckingham. Sir Thomas used to
be called the “jeering Lord Chief Justice,” because of the sarcastic
things he used to say. For example, when he condemned Prynne, he said
that “he might have the _Book of Martyrs_ to amuse him in prison.”

We have already spoken about the burials of the great men of the
Commonwealth, and must speak of some of the famous people of the later
Stuart times after the Restoration.

The great Lord Clarendon, father of James II’s first wife, and therefore
grandfather of Queen Mary and Queen Anne, is buried near the steps of
Henry VII’s Chapel. Every one will remember the name of his famous book,
_The History of the Great Rebellion_.

In Henry VII’s Chapel, not far from the tomb of Queen Elizabeth, is
buried General Monck, the man who had so much to do with the Restoration
of the Stuart Kings. He was made Duke of Albemarle by Charles II. His
funeral was very stately, and a large monument was put up to him close
to the graves of the Stuart sovereigns, whom he had helped to bring back
to England.

There are several graves and monuments in the Abbey which remind us of
the great sea-fights with the Dutch that were going on just at this
time.

One of these is the monument to Edward Montague, Earl of Sandwich, who
took such a great part in the victory over De Ruyter off Sole Bay in
1672. Lord Sandwich’s ship was somehow set on fire; it blew up, and he
perished with it. He was buried in General Monck’s vault in Henry VII’s
Chapel. Two young lieutenants, Sir Charles Harbord and Clement Cottrell,
who died with Lord Sandwich, are commemorated in the Nave.

Another distinguished sailor, Sir Freschville Holles, was also killed in
the engagement off Sole Bay, and is buried in St. Edmund’s Chapel. Sir
Freschville Holles had been knighted by Charles II after the naval
victory over the Dutch off Lowestoft in 1665. Five other officers, who
were all killed in this battle off Lowestoft, are buried in the North
Ambulatory.

Admiral Sir Edward Spragge and a young lieutenant called Richard Le
Neve, who were killed in a sea-fight with Van Tromp in the year 1673,
are also buried in the Abbey.

Another name we ought to remember is that of Sir Palmes Fairborne,
Governor of Tangier, who was killed when defending Tangier against the
Moors in 1680. His monument is in the Nave, and reminds us that Tangier
once belonged to England, having been part of the dowry of Catherine of
Braganza, wife of Charles II. Sir Palmes Fairborne was buried at
Tangier.

The Battle of the Boyne in the reign of William III is brought to our
minds when we look at the monument of General Philipps in the North
Transept. General Philipps fought on William III’s side in that battle.
He lived to a great age, and was Governor of Nova Scotia from 1720 to
1740.

In the Nave there is a monument to Admiral Sir Thomas Hardy, who
distinguished himself in the naval war of Queen Anne’s reign, and fought
under Admiral Rooke at Cadiz in 1702. Sir Thomas Hardy did not die until
1732, but he really belongs to these later Stuart times. The taking of
Gibraltar in 1704 is recalled to our minds later on by the memorials to
Richard Kane and Coote Manningham. Kane held Gibraltar for eight months
against the Spaniards in George I’s reign.

We must now turn to some of the graves and monuments connected with the
great French war of Queen Anne’s reign—the War of the Spanish
Succession, as it was called.

The body of the great Duke of Marlborough, the victorious General at the
Battles of Blenheim, Ramillies, Oudenarde, and Malplaquet, was buried in
the Abbey in 1722, and removed to the Chapel at Blenheim Palace
twenty-four years afterwards. The Duke’s first grave was in Henry VII’s
Chapel, in the vault where Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, and others had
lain.

In the Nave are monuments to General Killigrew, who was killed at the
Battle of Almanza in 1707, to Colonel Bringfield, who was killed at
Ramillies in 1706, and to Major Creed, who was killed at Blenheim in
1704.

In the North Ambulatory is a monument to Earl Ligonier, one of Queen
Anne’s Generals, who fought under Marlborough, and was at the Battle of
Blenheim. Lord Ligonier belonged to an old Huguenot family from the
south of France, and he, with some other distinguished Huguenots who are
buried in the Abbey, came over to England about the time of the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, when the Protestant worship
was forbidden in France, and many Huguenots took refuge in England. Earl
Ligonier died in 1770.

Another hero of the Dutch and French wars rests in the Abbey, and that
is Sir Cloudesley Shovel, one of the greatest naval commanders of the
time. His monument is rather curious, and represents him wearing Roman
armour and a wig such as was in fashion in his own day. The story of his
death is a very dreadful one. The Admiral had helped in the almost
entire destruction of the French Mediterranean squadron in 1707, and was
sailing for home when a violent gale drove his ship on to the rocks off
the Scilly Isles. The ship was wrecked, and Sir Cloudesley Shovel was
washed ashore, bruised and unconscious, but not quite dead. Thirty years
afterwards a fisherman’s wife confessed that she had found the body, and
that for the sake of a valuable emerald ring the Admiral wore she had
actually killed him.

In the Nave is a curious tablet in memory of Admiral Baker, who was
second in command to Sir Cloudesley Shovel, and brought the rest of the
ships home after Sir Cloudesley’s flagship was lost. Admiral Baker was
afterwards Governor of the Island of Minorca, which at that time
belonged to England. He died in Minorca in 1716, and is buried there.
Minorca had been added to our possessions by the first Earl Stanhope,
who did distinguished service in the War of the Spanish Succession. He
and three other of the Earls Stanhope have a monument on the Choir
Screen, opposite to that of Sir Isaac Newton.

We must now look back through all the Stuart and Commonwealth time, and
say a few words about the poets and other writers who belong to those
days, and who are buried in the Abbey.

Ben Jonson, the celebrated poet and play-writer, and a contemporary of
Shakspeare, is buried in the Nave, and has a monument in Poets’ Corner.
On the monument is the well-known inscription: “O rare Ben Jonson!” Ben
Jonson was born near Westminster; he was educated at Westminster School,
and during his last years he lived close to the Abbey. He died in 1637,
in a little house in St. Margaret’s Churchyard. There are one or two
famous stories about Ben Jonson asking for a grave in the Abbey. One
story says that he begged for eighteen inches of square ground in the
Abbey from Charles I. Another says that in a conversation with the Dean
he said he was too poor to have a full-length grave. “No sir, six feet
long by two feet wide is too much for me. Two feet by two feet will do
all I want.” “You shall have it,” said the Dean, and thus the
conversation ended. Whether these curious stories are true or not, it is
the fact that Ben Jonson was buried standing up. This was discovered
when Sir Robert Wilson’s grave was being made in 1849.

Looking round Poets’ Corner, we find the names of the following poets:—

Michael Drayton, author of the _Polyolbion_, who died in 1631. The
beautiful epitaph is said to be by either Ben Jonson or Francis Quarles.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  POETS’ CORNER.
]

Abraham Cowley, who died in 1667. He had a very grand funeral in the
Abbey, which was attended by many distinguished people. Cowley was
educated at Westminster School, and he was a devoted Royalist.

Sir William Davenant, the Cavalier, who succeeded Ben Jonson as
Poet-Laureate in Charles I’s time. He died in 1668.

John Dryden, Poet-Laureate to Charles II and James II. He was educated
at Westminster School under the famous Headmaster, Dr. Busby. Dryden
began by being a great admirer of Cromwell, but afterwards he became a
strong Royalist and held several offices under the crown after the
Restoration. He died in 1700, in great poverty, and is buried near
Chaucer. His best known poems are perhaps the Ode on “Alexander’s Feast”
and the “Ode for St. Cecilia’s Day.” His political satires “Absalom and
Achitophel” and “The Hind and the Panther” were the works which made his
fame in his own day.

On the south wall of Poets’ Corner is a small monument to Samuel Butler,
the author of a famous satire on the Puritans, called _Hudibras_. Samuel
Butler lived from the reign of James I until after the Restoration, and
died in 1680.

Francis Beaumont, who wrote plays with John Fletcher, is buried close to
Poets’ Corner with his brother, Sir John Beaumont, who was also a poet.
He died in 1616.

But, as we all know, far the greatest poet of those days was John
Milton, whose monument is not far from the grave of Spenser.

Milton is not buried in the Abbey, but in St. Giles’ Cripplegate. As the
Abbey was always strongly Royalist, it was a long time before Milton’s
name was allowed even to appear on its walls, Milton having been so
prominent on the Parliamentarian side. Not even _Paradise Lost_ could
make them altogether forget his Puritan sympathies. However, in 1738,
the monument we now see in Poets’ Corner was put up by a certain William
Benson, who belonged to the Whig party in politics. Thus one of the
greatest English poets came at last by his own.

When speaking of Milton we are reminded of one of our best English
musicians, Henry Lawes, who wrote the music to _Comus_, and who is
buried in the cloisters. His brother, William Lawes, was a member of the
Abbey choir.

A fine bust of the well-known composer, Orlando Gibbons, has quite
lately been placed in the Abbey, in that North Aisle of the Choir which
is known as the “Musicians’ Aisle.” Orlando Gibbons was appointed
organist of the Abbey in 1623. His son, Christopher Gibbons, was the
first organist of the Abbey after the Restoration, and was a favourite
of Charles II. He is buried in the Cloisters.

Close by is the grave of Henry Purcell, who is perhaps our greatest
English composer. He belongs entirely to the Stuart times, and his life
was spent at Westminster. He was organist of the Abbey and composed some
of our finest English Church music, besides other things. He died in
1695, at about the same age as Mozart, Schubert, and Mendelssohn, that
is, 37. Above his grave is a tablet with an epitaph said to have been
written by Dryden. It runs as follows:—

“Here lies Henry Purcell, Esq., who left this life, and is gone to that
blessed place where only his Harmony can be exceeded.”

Two other well-known Church musicians of the Stuart times are buried in
this aisle; these are Dr. John Blow and Dr. William Croft, who were both
organists at the Abbey.

All English children will like to know that there is very soon to be a
window in the Abbey to John Bunyan, author of the _Pilgrim’s Progress_.
The window will commemorate his life and works.

Another remarkable writer of the Stuart and Commonwealth times, that
learned and holy man, Richard Baxter, author of the _Saint’s Everlasting
Rest_, has no memorial in the Abbey, but he is known to have preached
one of his finest sermons here in 1654, and this is very interesting to
remember.

The grave of Sir Robert Moray, First President of the Royal Society,
reminds us of the beginning of that great Society during the reigns of
the later Stuart Kings. Sir Robert Moray was both a soldier and a man of
science. Burnet calls him “the wisest and worthiest man of his age.” He
died in 1673.

The only painter who has a monument in the Abbey belongs to Stuart
times. This is Sir Godfrey Kneller, a celebrated portrait painter in the
reigns of Charles II, James II, William III, and Queen Anne. He was a
Westphalian by birth. He died in 1723, and was buried in the garden of
his house at Whitton. Kneller did not want to be buried in the Abbey;
for, he said: “they do bury fools there.”

Another interesting remembrance of these troubled Stuart days is the
monument in the Cloisters to Sir Edmond Berry Godfrey. He was the Judge
to whom Titus Oates professed to reveal the Popish plot of 1678. Sir
Edmund Berry Godfrey’s death was rather mysterious, and it was supposed,
though not on good foundation, that he had been murdered by some one
connected with the plot.

We must mention one more grave in the Abbey itself. This is the grave of
the wonderful old Thomas Parr,—“old Parr” as he used to be called. He
died in 1635, and always claimed that he had been born in 1483. He is
buried in the South Transept, and his epitaph says that “He lived in the
reignes of ten princes, namely: King Edward IV, King Edward V, King
Richard III, King Henry VII, King Henry VIII, King Edward VI, Queen
Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles; aged 152 years, and was
buried here, 1635.”

We have now mentioned most of the principal people of the Stuart and
Commonwealth times who are in any way connected with the Abbey, and must
pass on to the history of the House of Hanover.

[Illustration:

  [_W. Rice, F.R.P.S._

  MONUMENT OF GENERAL WOLFE.
]




                              CHAPTER VIII
            THE HOUSE OF HANOVER AND THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

    “_We were dreamers, dreaming greatly, in the man-stifled town;
    We yearned beyond the sky-line where the strange roads go down.
    Came the Whisper, came the Vision, came the Power with the Need,
    Till the Soul that is not man’s soul was lent us to lead._”
                        RUDYARD KIPLING (_The Seven Seas_).


At the death of Queen Anne a great change took place in the reigning
family. The people would not have Queen Anne’s brother, Prince James,
for their King, because he was a Roman Catholic, but there were many
plans and plots in his favour, as we have heard. And even here again the
Abbey plays a part in it all, for the famous Dean of Westminster,
Francis Atterbury, was concerned in these Jacobite plots. It is said,
indeed, that on Queen Anne’s death he had been ready to go to Charing
Cross to proclaim James III, but James and his friends somehow let their
opportunity slip, and instead of James III, George I was proclaimed.
Later on it was discovered that Jacobite plots still went on at the
Westminster Deanery, and Dean Atterbury was imprisoned and then exiled
in France, where he died in 1731–32. He is buried in the Abbey, close to
the Deanery entrance in the Nave, and, as he wished, “as far from Kings
and Cæsars as the space will admit of.”

George I, in spite of his mother’s descent from the Stuarts, was really
a foreigner, and he is buried in his native town of Hanover, just as the
first Norman King is buried at Caen, and the first Plantagenet Kings at
Fontevrault.

George II, and his wife, Caroline of Anspach, are buried in Henry’s
VII’s Chapel, straight in front of Edward VI’s grave. Queen Caroline
died in 1737, and George II in 1760. They are the last sovereigns buried
at Westminster. Since that time the Kings and Queens of England have
been buried at Windsor and in the new Mausoleum at Frogmore, where Queen
Victoria and Prince Albert rest.

At the funeral of Queen Caroline the choir sang the beautiful anthem
which had just been composed by Handel, “When the ear heard her, then it
blessed her.” It was King George’s special wish that his ashes should
mingle with his wife’s, and therefore the two coffins are placed in one
large sarcophagus. There is no monument; only the names on the stones
above.

It is interesting to remember that George II was the last English
sovereign to be present at a battle. During the years 1740 to 1748
several of the nations of Europe were fighting in what was called the
War of the Austrian Succession. This war was really caused by Frederick
the Great of Prussia and other German sovereigns trying to get various
possessions away from the Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. England took
the Austrian side, and George II himself joined the army at the Battle
of Dettingen, in 1743. The English and their allies were victorious.
Handel composed his famous “Dettingen Te Deum” for the thanksgiving
after the victory.

Several other members of the Hanoverian Royal House are buried in the
central aisle of Henry VII’s Chapel. Among them are the following:
Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales (son of George II), and his wife,
Augusta Princess of Wales, the father and mother of King George III.

William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, third son of George II, is also
buried here. The Duke of Cumberland was a brave soldier, but his
severity to the Scotch Jacobites after the Battle of Culloden in 1746
earned him the name of “the Butcher.” The Scotch, who had been fighting
for Prince Charlie, were mercilessly slaughtered, and this cruelty has
never been quite forgotten.

There are several other monuments in the Abbey to remind us of the
Jacobite Rising of 1745. Such, for instance, is the monument to Marshal
Wade, on the south side of the Nave. Marshal Wade was commander-in-chief
of the army which was sent to quell the rebellion, and he was the man
who made the great military roads through the Highlands spoken of in the
well-known rhyme—

         “If you’d seen these roads before they were made
         You would hold up your hands and bless Marshal Wade.”

Two other soldiers who fought at Culloden, General Guest and Colonel
Webb, are buried in the East Cloister. General Guest, who has a monument
in the North Transept, defended Edinburgh against the rebels in 1745.

There is a tablet to Colonel Webb in the East Cloister.

Just at this time France declared war upon England, and took up the
cause of Prince Charles Edward. In 1745 a battle was fought at Fontenoy,
in Flanders. The English and their allies were under the command of the
Duke of Cumberland, but their army was much smaller than the French
army, and although they made a gallant attempt, they had to retreat. In
the Westminster Cloisters there is a monument to two brave
soldier-brothers of the name of Duroure, one of whom was killed at
Fontenoy.

The naval victories over the French won by Admiral Anson and Admiral
Hawke in 1747 are recorded on the Abbey walls by the monuments of
Captain Philip Saumarez and Sir Charles Saunders, who both fought in the
action off Finisterre. We shall meet with Sir Charles Saunders’s name
again later on.

The monument to Admiral Vernon, at the end of the North Transept, tells
us of the war with Spain in 1737–40, and of the English victories at
Porto Bello and Cartagena. In the North Transept aisle is a monument to
Lord Aubrey Beauclerk, who was killed in 1740, on Admiral Vernon’s
expedition to Cartagena. And again, we are reminded of the fights with
the Spanish fleet in the West Indies when we look at the monuments to
Admiral Wager and Sir Peter Warren, which are also both in the North
Transept. Sir Peter Warren’s monument is a very fanciful one. It was
made by the French sculptor, Roubiliac, the sculptor of the well-known
Nightingale Monument in the Chapel of St. Michael. Roubiliac has
actually represented the marks of smallpox on the face of Sir Peter
Warren’s bust!

Sir Peter Warren’s nephew, Admiral Tyrrell, has a monument in the Nave.
Tyrrell once defeated three French men-of-war single-handed, while he
was commanding the _Buckingham_. He died in 1766, and is buried at sea.

Close to the entrance of the former Baptistery is the huge monument to
Captain James Cornewall, who was killed in a great fight with the
Spanish-French fleet off Toulon early in 1744. This monument was the
first which was erected by Parliament in honour of a distinguished
sailor.

In 1756 began the Seven Years’ War, between Prussia on one side, and
Austria, France, Russia, Poland, Saxony, and Sweden on the other. These
countries wanted to break up the kingdom of Prussia, which was becoming
very powerful under Frederick the Great. Now, England was already at war
with France, and she took the side of Prussia. The Duke of Cumberland,
of whom we have already heard a good deal, was in command of the army in
Hanover. At first, things seemed to be going very badly for England, but
the tide turned when William Pitt, “the Great Commoner,” as he was
called, became War Minister. William Pitt was indeed the foremost man in
England’s history at this time, for not only did he strengthen our
position in Europe, but it was he who slowly built up our world-wide
Empire. He was created Earl of Chatham in 1766, and died in 1778. All
this is most interesting and important to remember when we are in the
Abbey, because this great English statesman is buried in the North
Transept—Statesmen’s Corner, as it began to be called. Pitt’s monument
is close to the North Transept door. High up you will see the figure and
keen, eagle face of Lord Chatham, who is represented as if speaking to a
large audience, his arm outstretched as though to make his words the
more impressive, reminding us that he was a great orator as well as
statesman. Perhaps he looked like this when he made his impassioned
protests against the unjust taxation of the American colonies.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  MONUMENT OF THE EARL OF CHATHAM.
]

The Seven Years’ War ended with the Peace of Paris in 1763, but
meanwhile there had been a great deal of fighting, chiefly at sea, with
the French and Spaniards. Many of these battles went on in the West
Indies, where England was victorious. One of our successes, the taking
of Havana from Spain in 1762, is brought back to our minds by the
monuments to Admiral Pocock and Rear-Admiral Harrison. Admiral Pocock
was commander-in-chief of the expedition, and conveyed Lord Albemarle
and his troops to Havana.

Another of the great events in our history during the eighteenth century
was the conquest of Canada from the French, a conquest always connected
with the name of General Wolfe, who was killed at the taking of Quebec
in 1759. There is a very large and, sad to say, very ugly monument to
General Wolfe in the Abbey. It is in the North Ambulatory, and makes a
great contrast to the splendid and beautiful Plantagenet tombs just
opposite to it. However, the monument is very interesting, because the
whole scene of Wolfe’s death is represented on it. The group of figures
shows Wolfe mortally wounded, and hearing, just before his death, that
his soldiers were putting the enemy to flight. Below this group is a
bronze bas-relief representing the Heights of Abraham, which had been
scaled by the British, and also the landing of the British troops from
the river St. Lawrence. So important was Wolfe’s victory that, in the
following year, the English had won all Canada.

Admiral Sir Charles Saunders has already been mentioned, and his grave
in the Islip Chapel reminds us, not only of his services in the French
war, but also of his share in the conquest of Canada, for he was
commander-in-chief of the fleet which carried General Wolfe and his
soldiers to the mouth of the St. Lawrence. Another Admiral, Charles
Holmes, who served with Saunders at the taking of Quebec, has a memorial
in the Nave. Viscount Howe and Colonel Townshend, who both fell at
Ticonderoga during this same Canadian War, have memorials in the Abbey.
Viscount Howe was the elder brother of the great Admiral, Lord Howe. His
monument was put up by the people of Massachusetts a short time before
the American colonies separated from the Mother Country.

General Adrian Hope, one of the first English Governors of Quebec, has a
monument in the North Transept.

This is perhaps a good place in which to speak of another man who did a
great deal for our Colonial Empire, namely, George Montague Dunk, Earl
of Halifax, whose monument is also in the North Transept. He was a
prominent statesman in the reigns of George II and George III, and he
did so much for commerce in America that he was called the “Father of
the Colonies.” He had also a great deal to do with the founding of the
colony of Nova Scotia, and its capital, Halifax, is named after him. He
died in 1771.

But we must now turn to quite another part of the world, and think of
what was going on in India. Just about this time, or a little earlier,
Clive had made the conquest of Bengal, and we find much to remind us of
this in the Abbey.

At the end of the North Transept aisle is the monument—a terribly ugly
one—put up by the East India Company to the memory of Admiral Watson,
who helped Clive to recapture Calcutta from the cruel Suraj-ad-Dowlah,
the man who shut up the Europeans in the “Black Hole of Calcutta,” of
which every one has heard. Watson also helped Clive to take
Chandernagore. He died in 1757, the year of the Battle of Plassey, and
the year after the taking of Calcutta.

Major-General Stringer Lawrence, who defended Trichinopoly against the
French in 1753–54, has a monument in the Nave. In the North Transept,
again, is the monument to Sir Eyre Coote, who drove out the French from
the Coromandel coast, and took Pondicherry in 1761.

Another monument in the North Transept reminds us of a famous man who is
connected with the Anglo-Indian history of the time. This is Warren
Hastings. It is true that he properly belongs to a rather later date,
but as he has so much to do with India we will speak of him now. Warren
Hastings was the first Governor-General of the British possessions in
India, and was appointed to that post in 1773. He did a great deal to
save the British Empire in India. It was while Warren Hastings was
Governor-General that Hyder Ali and son, Tippoo Saib, rose against the
English, and Hastings put down the rebellion. Unhappily, his enemies
accused him of wrongful exactions of money, and when Warren Hastings
returned to England he was impeached before the House of Lords on
charges of cruelty and oppression towards the natives of India. The
trial went on for years, and Hastings was finally acquitted. The
expenses of the trial left him penniless, but the East India Company
granted him a pension, and he spent his remaining years in retirement at
his own home at Daylesford. He is not buried in the Abbey, but he has a
special connection with Westminster, because he was educated at
Westminster School. Hastings died in 1818.

In the North Transept is a statue of Sir John Malcolm, another soldier
who greatly distinguished himself in the various wars in India during
Clive’s time. He was sent as Envoy to Persia in 1799, being the first
English Envoy sent there since the reign of Queen Elizabeth. He was
finally Governor of Bombay in 1830, and died in 1833.

As we know, the disturbances in India went on for some long time, in
spite of English victories under General Lake and Sir Arthur Wellesley
(afterwards Duke of Wellington). Wellesley’s great victory in this war
was at the Battle of Assaye, in 1803.

Again, all English people, young and old, know about the war in which we
lost our American colonies during George III’s reign, and there are
several monuments in the Abbey to bring the story of it back to our
minds.

General Burgoyne, whose surrender at Saratoga lost America to England,
is buried in the North Cloister. Near him is buried Colonel Enoch
Markham, who served throughout the same war. In the Abbey itself is the
famous monument of Major André, who was hanged as a spy by the Americans
in 1780. André had gone on a secret mission to the American General,
Arnold, who betrayed a fortress on the Hudson River to the British. On
his way back from the meeting André was taken, and, in spite of every
effort to save him from a traitor’s death, he was hanged by order of
General Washington, and was buried under the gallows on the banks of the
Hudson. Forty years later his body was removed, at the request of the
Duke of York, and was finally buried in the Abbey. Some locks of his
beautiful hair still remained, and these were sent to his sisters. The
chest in which André’s bones were sent home is still in the Islip
Chantry. His monument is in the south aisle of the Nave, and the head of
his figure has more than once been broken off and taken away, either by
people with strong political feelings on one side or the other, or else
by some mischievous schoolboy. There is a famous story of Charles Lamb
half accusing Southey of having carried off André’s head. Southey did
not like this, and it was a long time before he quite forgot it.

The war with the American colonies is thought to have broken Lord
Chatham’s heart. Every one remembers the last scene in his public life—a
scene represented in a famous picture—when Lord Chatham came to the
House of Lords to make one last protest against a policy which meant the
loss of the American colonies. During his speech he fell to the ground
in a fit, and died a few weeks afterwards.

The French wars in the later part of the eighteenth century have a
memorial in the Abbey in the enormous monument to the three captains,
Bayne, Blair, and Lord Robert Manners, in the North Transept. These
three captains fell in 1782, at Admiral Rodney’s victorious fight with
the French off Guadaloupe in the West Indies. In St. Michael’s Chapel is
another memorial of the same wars in the monument which tells of the
death of Admiral Kempenfelt in the shipwreck of the _Royal George_ at
Spithead in 1782.

Again, Lord Howe’s famous victory over the French off Ushant, on June
1st, 1794, has left its mark on the Abbey in the monuments of Captains
Hardy and Hutt, and of Captain Montagu, which are both in the Nave.

In the reign of George I there was a terrible happening which caused
great misery throughout England, and which has never been forgotten.
This was what was called the South Sea Bubble,—that is, the failure of
the South Sea Company. We are reminded of this disgraceful business even
in the Abbey, because of the grave and monument of the poet Craggs, who
was mixed up with it. Craggs is buried in Henry VII’s Chapel, and his
monument is in the Baptistery.

As we are now coming quite close to the end of the eighteenth century it
will be best to turn back and think of some of the great writers, men of
science, musicians and others, who belonged to that time and are either
buried or commemorated in the Abbey.

We will begin with Joseph Addison, the author of many beautiful essays
in the _Spectator_ and the _Tatler_. He died in 1719, and was buried in
Henry VII’s Chapel, in the same aisle as the Tudor Queens. His statue is
in Poets’ Corner. Addison’s beautiful hymn, “The spacious firmament on
high,” is sometimes sung in the Abbey, and ought to be well known to all
English children.

Now we come to the great Sir Isaac Newton, the famous mathematician and
philosopher, who discovered the law of gravitation. He died in 1727, and
was buried in the Nave, close to the Screen. He had a very stately
funeral, at which a great number of distinguished men were present. The
famous French writer, Voltaire, was there as a spectator. The monument
is quite near the grave, and is meant to represent Newton’s discoveries.
It is not the sort of monument we care about now, and the inscription on
the gravestone below is much better: “Here lies all that was mortal of
Isaac Newton.”

James Thomson, who wrote a poem called _The Seasons_, has a monument in
Poets’ Corner. He died in George II’s reign, and is buried in Richmond
Parish Church.

Sir Richard Steele, a famous essay writer of the time, is brought to our
memory by the grave of his second wife in Poets’ Corner.

John Gay, author of the _Fables_, which were written for the education
of the Duke of Cumberland, was buried in Poets’ Corner in 1732. His
monument is over the door into St. Faith’s Chapel, and on it are carved
these curious lines—

                “Life is a jest, and all things show it;
                I thought so once, and now I know it.”

Thomas Gray, who wrote the famous _Elegy in a Country Churchyard_, has a
monument in Poets’ Corner, but he is buried in the beautiful churchyard
at Stoke Pogis, which he loved so well. Gray’s poem is so celebrated
that a learned Italian has lately made a very beautiful translation of
it into his lovely native tongue. Gray died in 1771.

Oliver Goldsmith, author of the _Vicar of Wakefield_, the _Deserted
Village_, and _She Stoops to Conquer_, died in 1774, and was buried in
the Temple Churchyard. He has a monument in Poets’ Corner, and the Latin
epitaph on it was written by the great Dr. Johnson.

Dr. Samuel Johnson, author of the _Lives of the Poets_, _Rasselas_, and
the famous English Dictionary, died in 1784, and is buried in the Abbey
at the foot of Shakspeare’s monument, close to David Garrick, the great
actor, who had died four years before. Dr. Johnson’s only monument is
his gravestone. Garrick has a rather foolish looking monument on the
western wall of the South Transept.

Near Shakspeare’s monument is the bust of Robert Burns, the Scottish
poet, who died in 1796.

A window in the former Baptistery commemorates two well known English
poets who were both educated at Westminster School. These are George
Herbert, who really belongs to the Stuart times, and William Cowper, who
died in 1800. George Herbert’s poems are all on sacred subjects, and
Cowper wrote some of the hymns which are very familiar to us all. But
Cowper also wrote other things, some of the best known of his poems
being the _Task_ and _John Gilpin_. This window was given to the Abbey
by Mr. Childs, of Philadelphia.

One of the greatest names of the eighteenth century is that of the
famous musician, George Frederick Handel, the composer of the “Messiah”
and many other splendid works. He died in 1759 and was buried in Poets’
Corner. His monument is by Roubiliac, and represents Handel holding the
music of his famous song, “I know that my Redeemer liveth.” Just below
his monument is a medallion in memory of the great Swedish singer, Jenny
Lind-Goldschmidt, who died in 1889, and who used to sing that very song
so finely. The same words are carved on her monument also.

When Charles Dickens was buried in 1870, the coffin of Handel was seen
by those who were present at the funeral.

While we are speaking of musicians it will be interesting to note that
Dr. Burney, author of the well-known _History of Music_, has a monument
in the Musicians’ aisle.

The monuments to Dr. Isaac Watts, the well-known hymn-writer, and to
John and Charles Wesley, are in the South Choir aisle, and bring back
the memory of men who did great work in the eighteenth century, work
that still has much influence in England.

Several of the eminent doctors of the eighteenth century are buried in
the Abbey. Such are Richard Mead, physician to George II, who died in
1754; Dr. John Freind, a favourite of George II and Queen Caroline, who
died in 1728; and Dr. Hugh Chamberlen, who also died in 1728.

Another man who was famous in a very different way was James Watt, the
inventor of the steam-engine. He has a monument in St. Paul’s Chapel. It
is of giant size, and actually broke down the pavement in the Chapel
when it was brought in. Watt died in 1819.

William Horneck, one of the earliest of our great English engineers, is
buried in the South Transept, and has a memorial tablet in the
North-West Tower. He died in 1746.

We will add to our list of eighteenth century men the names of two
inventors, who are buried side by side in the Nave. These are (1) Thomas
Tompion, who died in 1713. He was called the “Father of English
Watch-making,” because of the many improvements he introduced in the art
of making clocks and watches. (2) George Graham, who died in 1751,
nephew and pupil of Tompion. He invented a curious astronomical
instrument called the “Orrery,” so named after Lord Orrery, who is also
buried in the Abbey.

In the North Transept there is a monument to Jonas Hanway, a
philanthropist and traveller, who died in 1786. Hanway was so kind, and
worked so hard to help those who were less fortunate than himself, that
he was called “the friend and father of the poor.” He is said to have
been the first person in England who ever carried an umbrella. It seems
curious that such a useful invention was not made until the eighteenth
century.

In the West Cloister is a monument to Dr. Benjamin Cooke, who died in
1793, having been organist of the Abbey for thirty years. In the North
Aisle of the Choir are the grave and monument of Dr. Samuel Arnold, a
well-known Church musician, who succeeded Dr. Cooke as organist of the
Abbey, and died in 1802.

Two famous engravers, William Woollett, who died in 1785, and George
Vertue, who died in 1756, have monuments in the West Cloister. Vertue is
buried in the North Cloister, near one of his family, who was a monk.

Several well-known actors and actresses of the eighteenth century are
also buried in the Cloisters.




                               CHAPTER IX
                 THE NINETEENTH AND TWENTIETH CENTURIES

                   —”_our slowly grown
                 And crown’d Republic_.”
                             TENNYSON (_To the Queen_).


It is very difficult properly to divide the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, because, of course, history does not cut itself up into
lengths of a hundred years. But in telling the story of a place like the
Abbey it is better to have some division, and as the French Revolution
took place nearly at the end of the eighteenth century, a kind of
natural division comes at that time, for we know that the French
Revolution made a great and lasting change all over Europe.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  STATUE OF WILLIAM WILBERFORCE.
]

When we begin to speak of the early nineteenth century we have again to
think of wars, for the fights with Napoleon were still going on.
Nelson’s great victories have not left much record in the Abbey,
excepting the wax effigy of the great Admiral himself, of which we will
speak later. One of Nelson’s Captains, Edward Cooke, has a monument in
the Abbey. Cooke died of a wound which he received during a victorious
fight with a French frigate in the Bay of Bengal in 1799.

When we think of these wars with Napoleon there is one grave in the
Abbey which at once comes to our mind. It is that of the younger William
Pitt, son of the great Earl of Chatham, of whom we read in the last
chapter. William Pitt became Prime Minister of England when he was only
twenty-three, and his ministry lasted through some years of a very
troubled and anxious time. In spite of Nelson’s victories he was so
crushed by Napoleon’s victory over the Austrians and Russians at
Austerlitz in December 1805, that he died shortly afterwards, worn out
with anxiety and disappointment. He was buried in the same vault with
his father, and he had a large monument put up to him over the great
West Door. He was only forty-six when he died, and it seems sad to think
that he should not have lived to see his country’s victories in the
Peninsular War and at Waterloo.

A further memorial of these wars is the bust of the Corsican patriot,
Pasquale de’ Paoli, who fought against Napoleon for the independence of
Corsica, and finally took refuge in England. His monument brings back an
interesting bit of English history, namely, that for a short time, from
1794 to 1797, Corsica was under British rule.

The war known as the Peninsular War began in 1808. England was helping
Spain against Napoleon, who had dethroned the King of Spain and made his
own brother, Joseph, King instead. The Spaniards rose in arms, and drove
Joseph Buonaparte out of Madrid. They appealed to England for help, and
Sir Arthur Wellesley went out with 10,000 men. He defeated the French at
Roliça, a victory which is commemorated in the Abbey by the tablet to
Lieutenant-Colonel George Lake, who fell in that battle.

The next year, 1809, was famous for the Battle of Corunna, where Sir
John Moore defeated the French and lost his own life. One of the
officers who fought at the Battle of Corunna, General Coote Manningham,
has a memorial in the North Transept. The services of Wellington’s chief
engineer, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Richard Fletcher, who died in 1813, are
recalled by a tablet to his memory in the North-West Tower. Fletcher
directed the engineering works during the sieges of Badajos, and
commanded the assault on the fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo, when these
fortresses were taken and held against the French by Wellington in 1812.
He was killed in an assault on the town of St. Sebastian. In the Nave is
buried Sir John Leith, another soldier who fought in this war and
greatly distinguished himself. He fought at Corunna, Badajos, and
Salamanca. He died in 1816, in the West Indies, where he was in command
of the forces.

There are memorial tablets in the Abbey to three other officers who fell
in the Peninsular War. One is to Captain Bryan, who fell in the Battle
of Talavera in 1809, when Sir Arthur Wellesley defeated King Joseph
Buonaparte and Marshals Victor and Jourdan; the second is to a
Lieutenant Beresford, who was killed at Ciudad Rodrigo in 1812; and the
third is to Lieutenant-Colonel Macleod, who fell at the siege of
Badajos, also in 1812.

In the Nave is buried a famous Admiral, Thomas Cochrane, Earl of
Dundonald, who served in many of our wars, first against Spain and then
on the Spanish side in the Peninsular War. Lord Dundonald died in 1860,
but he left the navy in 1814 because of a false accusation which was
made against him. He then went out to Chili, where he served the cause
of Chilian Independence. Lord Dundonald was afterwards proved to have
been innocent of the charges made against him, and his banner as Knight
of the Bath was restored to its place in Henry VII’s Chapel. At the time
of his disgrace it had been taken away and kicked down the steps of the
Chapel.

In the Nave is another monument connected with this time in our history.
It is that of Spencer Perceval, who was Prime Minister during the
Peninsular War. He was shot in the Lobby of the House of Commons in 1812
by a man whose business had been ruined by the war, and who was supposed
to be mad.

The bust of Lord John Russell in the North-West Tower, a part which is
often called “Whigs’ Corner,” reminds us of the great Parliamentary
Reform Bill, which was one of the most important events in the last
century. The change was much needed, as the people of the country were
not properly represented. Some large and important towns had no member
at all, while some very small and insignificant places were allowed to
return one or more members to Parliament. The reform was made more
difficult on account of the disturbances and revolutions in France and
elsewhere, which made people think it was better to have no changes at
all. However, in 1831, Lord John Russell brought in his Reform Bill,
which passed, after great discussion and struggle, in 1832. Lord John
Russell, afterwards Earl Russell, was educated at Westminster School. He
is not buried in the Abbey, although it was proposed to give him a
public funeral there. It was his own wish to be buried with his family
at Chenies, in Buckinghamshire.

We have just spoken of the changes and revolutions that went on in
France during the earlier years of the nineteenth century. We are
reminded of these when we find in the Abbey the beautiful tomb of the
Duc de Montpensier, brother of King Louis Philippe, who died in 1807,
while he and his brother were living in exile in England. The Duke is
buried in Henry VII’s Chapel, quite close to Dean Stanley. The Duc de
Montpensier is the only French prince buried in the Abbey. His monument
is one of the finest modern ones that we have at Westminster. Queen
Louise of Savoy, wife of King Louis XVIII of France, was also buried for
a short time in the Abbey, and there is an interesting account of her
funeral in the Precentor’s book. Her body was afterwards removed to
Sardinia. Queen Louise died in 1810.

But to return to our own English history. One of the first acts of the
new reformed Parliament was to abolish negro slavery in all the English
colonies and possessions. This great work of Christian charity had been
for years in the minds of many good people who had worked and fought
hard for the cause. The measure passed in 1833.

Like the Reform Bill, the abolition of the Slave Trade was one of the
greatest events in the nineteenth century, and there are many memorials
of it in the Abbey.

We will begin by mentioning Charles James Fox, who was the great
political rival of the younger Pitt, and who died a few months after
him, in 1806. He was buried in the North Transept, but his monument is
in the Nave, not far from Pitt’s. The kneeling figure of the negro on
the monument is an allusion to Fox’s last speech in the House of
Commons, when he proposed the abolition of the Slave Trade.

In the South Transept there is a monument to Granville Sharp, who did so
much in the cause that he was called the father of the Anti-Slavery
Movement. He was also one of the founders of the British and Foreign
Bible Society. He died in 1813, and the African Society put up the
monument to him.

Zachary Macaulay, who had been Governor of Sierra Leone, was another
fighter in the same cause. He has a monument in “Whigs’ Corner,” under
the North-West Tower.

But the name chiefly remembered when we speak of the Anti-Slavery
Movement is that of William Wilberforce, who died in 1833, just before
the great Emancipation Day, the day which set the slaves free in all the
British dominions. Wilberforce’s monument is in the North Choir aisle,
and represents him sitting in a chair with his legs crossed, and in a
very odd posture altogether. He is buried in the North Transept.

Near Wilberforce’s monument is that of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, who had
also helped in the fight against the Slave Trade. Buxton had also done a
great work in the reform of our laws concerning the punishment of
criminals, and his labours were shared by Sir James Mackintosh, who has
a memorial bust in “Whigs’ Corner.”

Not far off is the monument to Sir Stamford Raffles, the first Governor
of the colony of Java, which we had conquered from the Dutch, and which
we afterwards gave back to them, much against Sir Stamford Raffles’s
advice. England owes her colony at Singapore to the influence of Sir
Stamford Raffles, and she also owes him her power in the Eastern Seas.
When he finally came home, Raffles founded the Zoological Society of
London, and was its first President. He ought to be remembered among the
men who helped to do away with slavery, as he himself set free all the
negroes who were under his authority. He died in 1826.

Two other monuments in “Whigs’ Corner” remind us of men who worked hard
for the abolition of the Slave Trade and for the change in our penal
laws. These are the monuments of Lord Holland and of the Marquis of
Lansdowne. Lord Holland was the nephew of Charles James Fox, whose
monument is close by. He died in 1840. Lord Lansdowne, who died in 1863,
had a long political career, which began in the days of Pitt.

[Illustration:

  [_W. Rice, F.R.P.S._

  CHARLES JAMES FOX.
]

Almost in the middle of the Nave lies the famous African explorer and
missionary, David Livingstone, who, although he belongs to a rather
later date, may well be remembered with the noble group of men who
fought against the Slave Trade. Livingstone died in Africa in 1873, and
his body was brought back to England by his faithful black servant,
Jacob Wainwight, who followed his coffin as it was carried up the Abbey,
and threw a palm branch into the open grave. On the tombstone are carved
the last words in Livingstone’s diary. They are as follows: “All I can
add in my solitude is, may Heaven’s rich blessing come down on every
one, American, English, or Turk, who will help to heal this open sore of
the world” (that is, the Slave Trade).

Another Parliamentary measure which was very important for England was
the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, and the introduction of Free Trade
a few years later. Two of the chief leaders of these movements have
memorials in the Abbey. One of them is Sir Robert Peel, whose statue
stands in a most conspicuous place just at the corner of the North
Transept and the North Ambulatory. The other is Richard Cobden, whose
bust is placed in the North Transept aisle.

We must now turn from home politics to more wars in various parts of the
world, wars which also have written some of their story on the Abbey
walls.

In 1854 the Crimean War, between Russia on one side and Turkey with her
English and French allies on the other, broke out. The real Westminster
memorial to the heroes of the Crimean War stands in Broad Sanctuary,
just outside the Abbey, and speaks to us of the Westminster scholars who
fell in the Crimea, the most famous of them being Lord Raglan. But there
are windows in the Abbey in memory of officers who served in this war,
as well as in the war in India which followed it. Some years before the
Crimean War there had been wars and disturbances in Afghanistan, in the
Punjaub, and in Burmah; and at last, in 1857, the terrible Indian Mutiny
broke out. The horrors of this time will probably never be forgotten
while English history lasts, and we need only speak of the massacre of
Cawnpore and the siege of Lucknow in order to bring the story of the
Mutiny back to every one’s mind.

There are many graves and monuments in the Abbey to tell us of the brave
men who saved our Indian Empire at that troubled time.

The first Afghan War is commemorated by the grave of Sir George Pollock,
who fought his way through the Khyber Pass to Cabul, after the terrible
slaughter of the British in 1842. Sir George Pollock was thanked by
Parliament for his services in that war. He died in 1872, and is buried
in the Nave.

In the North Transept is the bust of Sir Herbert Edwardes, who greatly
distinguished himself in the Sikh War, and quelled the outbreak at
Mooltan in 1848. He also did good service during the Mutiny. He died in
1868.

In the Nave are the graves of three of the great heroes of the Indian
Mutiny, namely, Sir Colin Campbell (afterwards Lord Clyde), Sir James
Outram, and John Laird Mair, Lord Lawrence.

Sir Colin Campbell joined the army when he was quite a boy, and fought
in the Peninsular War. He served under Sir John Moore in the advance to
Salamanca, and in the famous retreat to Corunna. Later on he fought in
the Sikh War, and then in the Crimean War. He was sent out to India to
help to crush the Mutiny, and the most celebrated thing he did was the
relief of Lucknow, thus putting an end to that terrible siege. He died
in 1863.

Sir James Outram’s grave is close by, and all English boys and girls
should look at his monument, where they will see a representation of the
great scene at Lucknow, when Sir Colin Campbell relieved the town and
met the gallant defenders, Outram and Havelock. Outram died in 1863.

The name of Sir Henry Lawrence ought also to be remembered when we speak
of Lucknow, although his body does not rest in the Abbey. He did much to
save Lucknow in the time of the siege, and he was killed on the ramparts
only a short time before Sir Colin Campbell arrived with his
Highlanders.

The grave of his brother, John, Lord Lawrence, reminds us of a great and
good man who served his country well in India. Although he was a
civilian and not a soldier by profession, he had great military ability,
and it was he who really saved the Punjaub at the time of the Mutiny. He
succeeded Lord Elgin as Viceroy of India in 1863, and died in 1879. On
his tombstone are words which we all might pray to deserve: “He feared
man so little because he feared God so much.”

There is a fine bust of Lord Lawrence against the south wall of the
Nave, not far from where he is buried.

In the North Transept are windows in memory of seven officers who were
killed in the Indian Mutiny. These are Sir Henry Barnard, K.C.B.,
Lieutenant-Colonel Woodford, Lovick Cooper, a young ensign, Captain
Thynne, Ensign Bankes, Captain Moorsom, and Lieutenant-Colonel Adrian
Hope.

Four of these officers had also fought in the Crimean War in 1854–56,
and had distinguished themselves by their services at that time.

Colonel Adrian Hope had also fought in the Kaffir War, and thus his name
brings the remembrance of South Africa into the Abbey, long before the
memorial was put up to those who fell in the last Boer War.

There is a window in the North Transept to the memory of officers who
were lost in the _Captain_, which foundered off Cape Finisterre on 7th
September 1870, five days after that great Battle of Sedan which ended
the terrible war between France and Germany.

In St. Andrew’s Chapel there is also a window to the memory of those
that fell in action and died from the effects of wounds or climate
during the Ashanti War in 1873.

A bronze bust in the North-West Tower reminds us of another soldier hero
of our time, Charles George Gordon, remembered chiefly for his work in
China, in Egypt, and in the Soudan. The story of Gordon’s death at
Khartoum in 1885 will never be forgotten. His name and noble character
are always kept fresh in our memory by the Gordon Boys’ Home, which does
such excellent work in training boys for the army.

South Africa has one direct memorial at Westminster, for in the North
Cloister there is a tablet in memory of the men of the Queen’s
Westminster Volunteer Corps who fell in the Boer War of 1899–1902. The
tablet was put up in 1901, and was unveiled by the Secretary of State
for War.

We are reminded of an earlier time in the history of the Volunteers by
the monument of George Herries, the first Colonel of the London and
Westminster Light Horse Volunteers, of which he was described as the
“father.” George Herries was a well-known merchant. He died in 1819, and
was buried in the Abbey with military honours. His monument is in the
Nave.

We must now look back over the nineteenth century, as we did over the
eighteenth, and call to mind many other great men whose graves and
monuments we find in the Abbey,—statesmen, writers, and men of science.

As we have been speaking of the political history of England, let us
begin with some of the great statesmen.

Lord Chatham, as we have seen, belonged to the eighteenth century. The
younger William Pitt, and his great political rival, Charles James Fox,
died quite early in the nineteenth century, and their graves and
monuments have already been described.

As we enter by the great North Door we see on our left a striking group
of three statues. These represent (1) George Canning, the great
statesman and orator, who died in 1827; (2) his son, Charles, Earl
Canning, Viceroy of India; and (3) their cousin, Stratford Canning,
Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe, who was for fifty years our Ambassador
in the East.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  STATESMEN’S CORNER, EASTERN AISLE.
]

Among other things, George Canning was closely connected with that
important political change of the last century, which is known as the
Roman Catholic Emancipation Bill. This was the measure which allowed
Roman Catholics to be members of Parliament, and removed other
disabilities under which they had suffered. The measure did not actually
become law until after Canning’s death.

Earl Canning was Governor-General of India during the Mutiny, and became
the first Viceroy. His name is always to be remembered with those of
Clyde, John and Henry Lawrence, and the other great men of the Mutiny
time. Lord Canning died in 1862. The Cannings are buried in the North
Transept, in a vault near that of the Pitt family.

Close by is the grave of Henry Grattan, who died in 1820, the great
defender of the rights of Ireland.

On the opposite side of the Transept to the Cannings is the statute of
George Canning’s chief political rival, Lord Castlereagh, afterwards
Marquis of Londonderry, who died in 1822. Lord Castlereagh was Foreign
Secretary, and attended the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818. He
helped greatly to make peace in Europe after all the fights with
Napoleon. He unfortunately became very unpopular later, partly because
of the heavy taxes the people had to pay after the French wars, and
partly because he thought the Press had too much liberty and he tried to
curtail that liberty. There was a terrible riot at his funeral, and the
mourners had to fight their way through an angry mob.

Close to Castlereagh’s statue is that of Lord Palmerston, who was twice
Prime Minister in Queen Victoria’s reign, after being Secretary of State
for War for twenty years. Lord Palmerston was Prime Minister during the
Crimean War and at the time when the Indian Mutiny began. He was given a
public funeral, and is buried in the North Transept. His wife is buried
with him.

On the side opposite to Castlereagh and Palmerston is the statue of
Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsfield. Lord Beaconsfield is remembered
as a famous leader of the Conservative party in Parliament, and as a man
who did much for the growth of the British Empire. It was at his
suggestion that the late Queen took the title of Empress of India, and
to him we owe much of our present position in Egypt. Lord Beaconsfield
was also a well-known writer of novels. His most famous books are
perhaps _Lothair_, _Sybil_, and _Coningsby_. Lord Beaconsfield died in
1881, and is buried at Hughenden in Buckinghamshire.

William Ewart Gladstone, the great Liberal leader, and Lord
Beaconsfield’s chief political opponent, is buried in the North
Transept, and his statue stands next to that of Disraeli. Mr. Gladstone
was four times Prime Minister. The Bill for the Disestablishment of the
Irish Church was passed when he was in power in 1871. Gladstone was not
only eminent in politics, but he exercised a considerable literary,
social, and moral influence over many of his fellow-countrymen.
Gladstone died in 1898.

In the year 1870 the Education Bill was passed, a Bill which has made a
great difference to all English people, as everybody now has the
opportunity of going to school and of having a good and useful teaching,
not only in reading and writing, but in many other things as well. The
scheme for this new plan of education was made by William Edward
Forster, who is commemorated in the Abbey by a medallion which is placed
above the monument of his uncle, Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, in the North
Choir aisle.

The grave and monument of Sir Rowland Hill in St. Paul’s Chapel remind
us of another important change which took place in 1839, namely, the
introduction of the penny postage and the invention of adhesive postage
stamps.

Another monument, a very beautiful and interesting one, is that erected
to the memory of Henry Fawcett, the blind Postmaster-General, who
accomplished so much good work in spite of the terrible disadvantage of
his blindness, which was the result of an accident when he was quite
young. This always seems to be a monument to undaunted courage and
perseverance in the face of great misfortune, and it should teach us to
be brave and patient, however much things may seem to be against us.

It is now time to speak of the chief authors of the century, and to turn
our thoughts once more to Poets’ Corner.

Here, next to Dr. Johnson, we find the grave of the brilliant
play-writer and parliamentary orator, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, the
author of the _Rivals_ and _The School for Scandal_. Sheridan died in
1816, the year after the Battle of Waterloo.

Against the wall, close to the door of St. Faith’s Chapel, is the bust
of the great novelist, Sir Walter Scott, who died in 1832. His _Waverley
Novels_ are too famous to need any description. We need only speak of
_Ivanhoe_, _Quentin Durward_, _The Antiquary_, and _Kenilworth_, in
order to remind English people of all ages of many hours of interest and
delight. The particular position was expressly chosen for the bust of
Sir Walter Scott, because it is close to the monument of the Duke of
Argyll and Greenwich, the same Duke of Argyll who appears in Scott’s
famous story, _The Heart of Midlothian_. The bust was placed in the
Abbey only a few years ago; it is a copy of the bust by Chantrey at
Abbotsford.

Above Shakspeare’s monument are busts of two celebrated poets of the
early part of the nineteenth century—Samuel Taylor Coleridge, author of
“The Ancient Mariner,” “Christabel,” and other well-known poems, and
Robert Southey, Poet-Laureate, author of “Thalaba,” “The Curse of
Kehama,” and the poem on the Waterfall at Lodore. Coleridge died in
1834, and Southey in 1843, in the reign of Queen Victoria. Neither
Coleridge nor Southey is buried in the Abbey. Southey was one of the
famous group of “Lake poets,” and is buried in the lake country, at
Crosthwaite, near Keswick.

Close by Shakspeare’s monument is the statue of Thomas Campbell, who
wrote “The Pleasures of Hope,” “The Battle of the Baltic,” “Ye Mariners
of England,” and other poems.

Under the South-West Tower, in the former Baptistery, is the monument of
the great poet, William Wordsworth, who lived through the time of the
French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars, and died in 1850. He was the
chief of the “Lake poets.” Wordsworth is not buried in the Abbey, but in
Grasmere churchyard, in that English lake-country where he was born and
which he loved so dearly. Wordsworth’s chief poems are “The Excursion,”
“The White Doe of Rylstone,” “Tintern Abbey,” the “Ode on Immortality,”
and the “Ode to Duty.” But there are many others, great and small, which
are part of the heritage he has left to his fellow-countrymen.

In the Baptistery, just opposite Wordsworth’s monument, is a memorial
portrait bust of Charles Kingsley, the great preacher and writer, author
of _Alton Locke_, _Westward Ho!_, _Hypatia_, and of many well-known
poems. Charles Kingsley is remembered with especial interest and
affection at the Abbey, as he was Canon of Westminster for two years. He
died in 1875, and is buried at Eversley, in Hampshire, where he was
rector for so long.

Next to Kingsley is a bust of Matthew Arnold, the poet, essayist, and
critic. Next to him again is a bust of Frederick Denison Maurice, a
great religious teacher of the nineteenth century. Opposite to these,
and next to Wordsworth, is the monument to John Keble, author of _The
Christian Year_. Next to that is the monument of the famous Dr. Thomas
Arnold, who was headmaster of Rugby, and who did much to improve the
whole life in the public schools of England. Matthew Arnold, of whom we
have just heard, was his son.

In Poets’ Corner, close to the grave of Chaucer, lie two other famous
poets of the Victorian age, Alfred Tennyson and Robert Browning.

Tennyson will always be remembered as the poet of _In Memoriam_ and _The
Idylls of the King_, and also of many splendid patriotic poems which all
English boys and girls ought to know. He died in 1892, and when his
grave was being dug in Poets’ Corner a skull and leg-bone were found,
which were evidently those of Geoffrey Chaucer, who had been buried here
nearly five hundred years before. By Tennyson’s own wish the Union Jack
was wrapped round his coffin and buried with him. A fine bust of
Tennyson has been placed against a pillar near his grave.

Robert Browning, author of _The Ring and the Book_, _Pippa Passes_, _By
the Fireside_, and many other famous poems, died at Venice in 1889. His
body was brought back to be buried in the Abbey. His wife, Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, well known as a poetess, is buried in Florence.

Near Chaucer’s monument is a bust of the American poet, Longfellow, who
died in 1882. Some of his poems are familiar to most English children.

Charles Dickens, the great novelist, is buried in Poets’ Corner, just
under Handel’s monument and close to Handel’s grave. Dickens will always
be remembered as the author of _David Copperfield_, _The Old Curiosity
Shop_, _Christmas Stories_, and many other books which are dear to the
hearts of all English people.

Against the wall, on either side of Addison’s statue, are the busts of
two other great writers of the last century,—Lord Macaulay, the poet and
historian, and William Makepeace Thackeray, the famous novelist. Lord
Macaulay, who died in 1859, was the son of Zachary Macaulay, of whom we
have already heard in connection with the abolition of the slave-trade.
Among Lord Macaulay’s best known writings are the _Lays of Ancient
Rome_. His grave is close by Addison’s statue. Thackeray, who wrote
_Esmond_, _The Newcomes_, _Vanity Fair_, and many other celebrated
books, is not buried in the Abbey, but at Kensal Green. He died in 1863.

Nearer to the Choir aisle are the busts of the two great historians of
Greece, Bishop Thirlwall and George Grote, who are buried in the same
grave. They both died in the latter half of the nineteenth century.

Just above the bust of Sir Walter Scott is a bronze medallion with a
portrait head of John Ruskin, author of _The Stones of Venice_, _Modern
Painters_, _Sesame and Lilies_, and many other well-known works on art
and life.

In St. Edmund’s Chapel is the grave of Edward Bulwer Lytton, Lord
Lytton, author of many widely read novels and historical romances. Among
his best known books are _The Last Days of Pompeii_, _The Caxtons_,
_Rienzi_, and _Kenelm Chillingly_. He died in 1873.

Several of the great actors of the nineteenth century are commemorated
in the Abbey. Such are Mrs. Siddons, and her brother, John Philip
Kemble, whose statues are in St. Andrew’s Chapel. Sir Henry Irving, the
well-known actor of Shakspeare’s plays, as well as of many others, died
in 1905, and is buried at the foot of Shakspeare’s monument, close to
the grave of his great brother-actor, David Garrick.

In the Musicians’ Aisle is the grave of Sir William Sterndale Bennett,
one of the chief English composers of his time. He died in 1875. In the
same aisle is a medallion in memory of Michael Balfe, who composed _The
Bohemian Girl_, and a window to James Turle, who was organist of the
Abbey for fifty-six years. In St. Andrew’s Chapel is a window in memory
of Vincent Novello, founder of the famous house of music publishers of
that name.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  GRAVES OF NEWTON, HERSCHEL, DARWIN, AND KELVIN.
]

The great and especial glory of the nineteenth century was the wonderful
development of almost every kind of scientific knowledge and work, and
the number of important scientific discoveries that were made. It is not
too much to say that some of these discoveries, and some of the new
theories about our world and the things in and around it, have
influenced and changed our lives and our thoughts very much indeed. We
can see this very plainly if we think of what Darwin has taught us, and
if we think of the invention of the steam-engine, the introduction of
railway travelling, and of steamships, of land and ocean telegraphy,
telephones, motors, wireless telegraphy, and now of airships. This
extraordinary progress in scientific research and knowledge is not
without its record in the Abbey, as we shall see. We shall find that
many of the great men of science who lived in the nineteenth century are
either buried or commemorated in the Abbey.

Foremost among these is Charles Robert Darwin, the biologist of
world-wide fame, author of _The Origin of Species_, _The Descent of
Man_, and other celebrated scientific works. Darwin died in 1882, and is
buried in the north aisle of the Nave, quite near the grave of Sir Isaac
Newton.

Next to Darwin lies the famous astronomer, Sir John Frederick Herschel,
who died in 1871. Another astronomer, John Couch Adams, discoverer of
the planet Neptune, has a memorial in this same north aisle. Close by
are memorials to James Prescott Joule, who discovered certain laws
connected with heat and electricity, and to Sir George Gabriel Stokes.

A little farther down the aisle is the grave of the great geologist, Sir
Charles Lyell, who died in 1875. His bust is placed near the tablet in
memory of Dr. John Woodward, who lived in the eighteenth century, and
who has been called the “father of English Geology.”

On the other side of the Nave is a memorial to William Buckland, Dean of
Westminster, who was twice President of the Geological Society, and
wrote many books about geology. In the South Transept, near the monument
of Dr. Busby, is the grave of William Spottiswoode, who was President of
the Royal Society and Printer to Queen Victoria. He died in 1883.

One of the most famous men of science of our own day, William Thomson,
Lord Kelvin, rests close to Newton. He was born in 1824, and died in
1907, and devoted his long life to the pursuit of science,—to what is
called “applied science” as well as to speculative science. We owe to
Lord Kelvin many of the wonderful inventions now in quite common use,—in
navigation, in telegraphing under the ocean, and in other ways.

One of the most important changes in the life of the whole nation was
brought about in the nineteenth century by the introduction of railway
travelling. Those of us who are quite young, and have hardly ever heard
of a time when there were no railways, cannot realise or understand how
great this change must be.

Even railways have their memorials in the Abbey, for in the Nave we find
the grave of Robert Stephenson, who died in 1859, engineer of the
Birmingham Railway and of the Britannia Bridge over the Menai Straits.
He is buried next to the famous engineer, Thomas Telford, who died in
1834, and whose chief works were the Caledonian Canal, the Menai Bridge,
and the plan for the inland navigation of Sweden. There is a large
statue of Telford in St. Andrew’s Chapel. Not far from the grave of
Robert Stephenson is a window in his memory. It is not at all beautiful,
as it represents railway bridges and other things which do not look well
in a stained-glass window,—but it is certainly interesting.

Near this are windows in memory of the great engineers (1) Richard
Trevithick, who died in 1833, the inventor of the high-pressure
steam-engine, and of the first real railway engine; (2) Brunel, who died
in 1859, and who built the largest steamships known in his time, the
_Great Eastern_ and the _Great Western_; and (3) John Locke, who died in
1860, and who designed the “Crewe Engine.”

Close to these a beautiful new window has been erected to the memory of
Sir Benjamin Baker, who died in 1907. He was the engineer of the Forth
Bridge, the Assouan Dam, and other important works. In the window are
full-length figures of Edward III and of Cardinal Langham, once Abbot of
Westminster.

Near the graves of Stephenson and Telford are buried four distinguished
architects of the nineteenth century. These are:—

(1) Sir Charles Barry, who built the present Houses of Parliament, and
who died in 1860.

(2) Sir Gilbert Scott, who died in 1878. He was one of the leaders in
the revival of Gothic architecture in England.

(3) George Edmund Street, who died in 1881. A distinguished architect in
the Gothic style. He designed the present Law Courts.

(4) John Loughborough Pearson, who died in 1897.

Sir Gilbert Scott and Mr. Pearson were both of them “Surveyors of the
Fabric” to the Abbey. This means that they had charge of the actual
building from the architectural point of view.

In the Chapel of St. John the Evangelist is a memorial to the great
Arctic explorer, Sir John Franklin, who was lost in 1847, with both his
crews, while making the discovery of the North-West Passage. The
monument was put up by Lady Franklin. On it is a representation of the
vessel fast in the Polar ice, and round the sculptured scene are the
words—

“O ye ice and snow, O ye frost and cold, bless ye the Lord; Praise him
and magnify Him for ever.”

Below are Tennyson’s beautiful lines—

           “Not here: the White North has thy bones; and thou
                   Heroic sailor soul,
           Art passing on thy happier voyage now
                   Towards no earthly pole.”

Close by is the memorial to another Arctic explorer, Admiral Sir Leopold
M‘Clintock, who died in 1907. It was he who discovered the remains of
Franklin’s ships, and thus found out how he had died.

Before ending this long list of people who are gathered into remembrance
in the Abbey, we must not forget the names of some of those who have
served their fellow-men by special works of love and kindness.

Close to the great West Door is a fine statue of Anthony Ashley Cooper,
Earl of Shaftesbury, who did a great deal to make the lives of poor
children healthier, happier, and better, and to whom England owes many
improvements in the laws about work in factories and mines.

Lord Shaftesbury is remembered in Westminster as President of the
Westminster Window Garden show, a flower show which was intended to
encourage poor people to grow nice flowers in their windows, and so to
brighten the dulness and ugliness of town streets, as well as to teach
them something about Nature. Lord Shaftesbury used to come every year to
give the prizes at this show, which used to be held in Dean’s Yard.

Lord Shaftesbury also took great interest in George Peabody’s scheme for
improving the dwellings of the poor, and tried all he could to help on
this good work. He died in 1883.

George Peabody, who gave such generous help towards building better
houses for the poor, was an American. He died in London in 1869, and his
body rested for a short time in the Abbey, close to the place where Lord
Shaftesbury’s statue now stands.

Quite near this spot also is the grave of Baroness Burdett-Coutts, who
died in 1907, and whose name will long be remembered for her works of
charity.




                               CHAPTER X
                            THE WAX EFFIGIES

                      ... “_We are such stuff
            As dreams are made on, and our little life
            Is rounded with a sleep._”
                                SHAKSPEARE (_The Tempest_).


Before speaking of the other parts of the Abbey buildings we must not
forget the little Islip Chantry, or upper part of Abbot Islip’s
beautiful chapel in the North Ambulatory. In this Chantry are the
presses which contain the celebrated wax effigies of which we so often
hear.

In olden times it used to be the custom to carry effigies in the funeral
processions of sovereigns and of other important personages, and to
leave these effigies standing beside the grave for a month or more after
the funeral. This custom succeeded to the yet older one of carrying the
dead body of the sovereign with its face exposed, in order to show that
the sovereign was really dead, and that there had been no foul play. In
those days, unfortunately, foul play was not very uncommon, as we see in
the case of Edward II and Richard II.

The oldest effigies were not made of wax, but of wood, and they had
heads, hands, and feet made of plaster. The effigy of Henry V was made
of boiled leather, or, as an old description says: “boyled hides.” In
later days people learned to make effigies in wax, and some of them were
no doubt very good portraits. There are eleven of these wax effigies
still shown in the Islip Chantry.

The oldest which now remains is that of Charles II, which stood for a
long time beside his grave in Henry VII’s Chapel. The face is just like
the pictures we see of Charles II. He wears the blue and red velvet
robes of a Knight of the Garter, with collar and ruffles of real, and
very beautiful, point lace. The effigy of Queen Elizabeth is a
Restoration, and no doubt a copy of the original, which had got quite
worn out by 1708. Some people think the head may really be that of the
first effigy. The face is very sad and worn, and looks as if Queen
Elizabeth had been very unhappy in her old age. We recognise the
familiar Elizabethan dress, the ruff, the high-heeled shoes, the pointed
bodice and wide skirts.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
]

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  CHARLES II.
]

Next to Queen Elizabeth stand the effigies of William III and Mary II,
which are placed together in one large case. The crown is on a pedestal
between the two figures, and both sovereigns carry the sceptre and the
orb, so as to show that they reigned jointly, Mary not being
Queen-Consort merely. William was evidently a good deal shorter than his
wife, for he stands on a foot-stool in order to look equal in height.
Mary wears a brocaded skirt, and a purple velvet robe over it. She also
wears imitation paste and pearl ornaments and beautiful lace in her
sleeves. The last effigy of a sovereign is that of Queen Anne. She is
represented seated, and is dressed in robes of brocaded silk. She wears
many ornaments, and has a crown over her dark, flowing hair. Her face is
rather fat, with a kindly, good-natured expression.

Close to the case which holds the effigy of Queen Anne is a figure of
General Monck, in armour. This figure used to look very much battered
and greatly the worse for wear, but it has lately been rather mended up.
The cap is the famous one mentioned in the _Ingoldsby Legends_, in the
well-known lines—

  “I thought on Naseby, Marston Moor, and Worcester’s crowning fight,
  When on my ear a sound there fell, it filled me with affright;
  As thus, in low unearthly tones, I heard a voice begin—
  ‘This here’s the cap of General Monck! Sir, please put summat in.’”

General Monck, afterwards Duke of Albemarle, is buried in Henry VII’s
Chapel, as we have already said.

The next effigy is that of Frances Theresa Stuart, Duchess of Richmond
and Lennox, a great beauty in her day. She was maid-of-honour to
Catherine of Braganza, wife of Charles II. She sat as a model for the
figure of Britannia on a medal which was struck to commemorate the
Treaty of Breda, when peace was made between the English and Dutch after
the first Dutch War. This was in 1667. The figure of Britannia is no
doubt the same that we now see on our pennies and halfpennies. Frances
Stuart is dressed in the robes she wore at the Coronation of Queen Anne.
Beside her is her parrot, which died a few days after her. This lady
left particular orders about her effigy, directing that it should be “as
well done in wax as can bee—and sett up in a presse by itself, ... with
cleare Crowne glasse before it, and dressed in my Coronation Robes and
Coronett.” The effigy at first stood beside the Duchess’s grave in Henry
VII’s Chapel.

Next to the Duchess of Richmond and Lennox stand the effigies of
Catherine, Duchess of Buckinghamshire, and her little son, the Marquis
of Normanby, who died when a child. The Duchess, with her husband and
children, are buried in Henry VII’s Chapel, and a large monument is
erected there to the Duke, who was distinguished as a politician,
soldier, and man of letters in the reigns of Charles II and James II.

The Duchess of Buckinghamshire died in 1743. Her effigy is dressed in
the robes that she wore at the Coronation of George II. This lady
settled all about her own funeral with the Garter King-at-Arms, and was
quite afraid lest she should die before the grand canopy came home. “Let
them send it,” she said, “though all the tassels are not finished.”
Buckingham House, where the Duchess lived, was built by her husband on
the site of the present Buckingham Palace.

In the middle of the Chantry is a glass case containing the effigy of
Edmund Sheffield, last Duke of Buckinghamshire, and son of the Duchess
whose effigy has just been described. The young Duke died in Rome in
1735, aged only nineteen. This effigy, which is a very fine one, was the
last ever carried at a funeral. The Duchess wanted to borrow the great
Duke of Marlborough’s funeral car for the funeral of her son. But Sarah,
the celebrated Duchess of Marlborough, replied very haughtily that “it
carried my Lord Marlborough, and it shall never be profaned by any other
corpse.” Whereupon the Duchess of Buckinghamshire retorted: “I have
consulted the undertaker, and he tells me I may have a finer for twenty
pounds.”

There are two other wax figures in the Chantry, but they are not,
properly speaking, effigies, because they were not used in the funeral
processions, but were only put up to attract sightseers. These figures
represent two very eminent Englishmen, namely, William Pitt the elder,
afterwards Lord Chatham, and Lord Nelson. Both figures are remarkably
good, and must be excellent likenesses. Lord Chatham wears his peer’s
robes, and a wig, such as was then the fashion.

Lord Nelson’s effigy is dressed in naval uniform; all the dress, except
the coat, belonged to Nelson himself. The eye-patch for Nelson’s blind
eye was found attached to the inner lining of the hat when Maclise
borrowed it to copy for his well-known picture, “The Death of Nelson.”

These wax effigies, then, are not mere curiosities, but are interesting,
both as showing us an ancient funeral custom and as representing people
who played a part in the English history of their day.

[Illustration:

  [_W. Rice, F.R.P.S._

  SOUTH CLOISTER.
]




                               CHAPTER XI
                         THE MONASTIC BUILDINGS

                  “_That Fabric rises high as Heaven,
                  Whose Basis on Devotion stands._”
                                      MATTHEW PRIOR.


With the help of the Abbey we have taken a long, and perhaps rather
hurried, journey through many centuries of our country’s history, and
have tried to think of the many links by which the Abbey is bound to all
English hearts. We must now turn back again across those centuries, and
try to remember something of the old monastery, of its buildings, of the
Abbots who governed it, and of the sort of lives the monks lived.

The Abbey, as we already know, was dedicated to St. Peter from the
earliest days. The monks belonged to the great Benedictine order. That
order, which had spread over all Europe, “from Poland to Portugal, and
from Cumberland to Calabria,” was founded by St. Benedict in the sixth
century after Christ. St. Benedict was born in Italy about the year 480,
during a very restless and troubled time, just after the last Emperor
had been driven out of Rome. Benedict very soon determined to live the
life of a monk, and when he was quite a boy he went away from Rome to a
place in the mountains near. From this place he went to a yet more
remote and lonely one, the wild and beautiful Subiaco, where the Emperor
Nero had once had a “villa” or country house.

There are two famous Benedictine monasteries at Subiaco, and it is an
interesting thing to remember that the first books printed in Italy were
printed at one of these monasteries, just as in England many of Caxton’s
books were printed under the shadow of the Benedictine Abbey of
Westminster.

Again, when St. Benedict built his great monastery at Monte Cassino, he
built it on the site of a Temple of Apollo, just as King Lucius is said
to have done in those far-off days at “Thorney,” or Westminster.

St. Benedict directed that the monks of his order should divide their
time between the services in the church, study, and manual work of some
kind. It should never be forgotten that it is largely to the monasteries
that we owe the preservation of learning, and our inheritance of the
great writings of the Greek and Roman world.

The idea of making monasteries places of study and learning did not
begin with St. Benedict, but Western Europe owes him a great debt for
having insisted that study should be an important part of a monk’s work.
This was a great service to mankind and to civilisation in those wild
days of barbarian invasion and almost constant war.

It should be remembered, too, that the clergy and monks were the chief,
if not the only, teachers during several centuries. If we want to see
and understand this we can find an example in what our own countryman,
Alcuin of York, did for education under the patronage and with the help
of Charlemagne.

The Chapel dedicated to St. Benedict in the Abbey has already been
mentioned two or three times. This Chapel is just at the entrance of the
South Ambulatory.

On the south side of the Abbey Church, and protected by it from the cold
north, lies the beautiful cloister where the monks and their pupils
spent a great deal of their time. The Cloister-walks form a quadrangle,
with a large grass plot in the middle. Under that peaceful grass plot
many of the Westminster monks are resting, and many people are buried in
the Cloister itself.

The present Cloister is of different dates. Parts of the East and North
Walks are of the time of Henry III and Edward I. Another part of the
East Walk was built in the reign of Edward III, and the South and West
Walks were built some years later by Abbot Litlington. It is said that
every style of English architecture can be seen in the Westminster
Cloisters; and this is true, because, as we shall see, some of the old
Norman Cloister remains, and in the great Cloister we can find the Early
English, the Decorated, and the Perpendicular styles.

The Cloister was not a burial-place only. It was a very important part
of the monastery, as much of the daily life went on there.

In those days the windows had glass in them; the floor and benches were
strewn with straw and hay in summer, and with rushes in winter. The
walls were decorated with frescoes, and lamps hung from the vaulting.

The East Cloister was given up to the Abbot, who was a great personage.
Whenever he passed, every one rose and bowed and kept silence. The monks
themselves used the North Cloister, where the Prior also sate. The
novices and pupils worked at their lessons in the West Cloister. The
pupils sate one behind the other; they were not allowed to make jokes or
to make signals to one another. They had to talk always in French. They
were to take great care about their writing and illuminations, and no
doubt many beautiful old illuminated missals and other books came forth
from those Cloister walks at Westminster.

In the South Cloister is a very large bluish gravestone, reminding us of
the terrible plague which visited most of Europe about the middle of the
fourteenth century, and which was called “The Black Death.” Twenty-six
of the Westminster monks, including the Abbot, died of the Black Death
in 1348–49, and the monks are supposed to have been buried beneath this
huge gravestone, which used to be called “Long Meg.” The Abbot,
Byrcheston, was buried near the Chapter-House entrance, in the part of
the Cloister which was built in his time.

Close to “Long Meg” are the graves of several of the Abbots of Norman
and early Plantagenet times. Three of the figures still remain close to
the wall, but the names are not carved over the right gravestones. After
1220 it became the custom to bury the Abbots in the church itself.

In the East Cloister there is a beautiful carved archway, which forms
the entrance to a lovely little passage with very sharply pointed
arches. This passage leads into the Chapter-House, one of the finest
parts of the Abbey buildings. The “incomparable Chapter-House,” as an
old chronicler calls it, was begun by Henry III in 1250. It is
eight-sided, and the vault springs from a tall and graceful central
pillar, just as the branches spring from a palm tree. The windows are
very famous for their beautiful tracery. The stained glass in them is
modern, and is a memorial to the late Dean Stanley.

The walls were once covered with paintings, but these have been sadly
destroyed, and only very few have been preserved. In the glass cases
which are now placed in the Chapter-House are many most interesting and
valuable things, such as the great illuminated missal presented to the
Abbey by Abbot Litlington, and charters granted to the Abbey by various
Kings, from the Saxon times onward.

There is also a splendidly bound book of Henry VII’s time, concerning
certain arrangements between the King and the Abbey of Westminster, and
the _Liber Regalis_, or Coronation book of Richard II.

In another case will be found an interesting collection of old seals.

The Westminster Chapter-House has had a very varied and rather exciting
history. In the old days the Chapter-House was the meeting-place of the
convent. There the affairs of the monastery used to be discussed; there
complaints might be made; there the monks might confess their faults;
and there, usually, they were punished. The Consistory Court of the
convent used to be held in the South-West Tower. The seats for the judge
and his assessors are still to be seen against the south wall, below the
monument to Henry Fawcett. A Consistory Court was the place where trials
which had to do with church matters were held.

[Illustration:

  [_G. A. Dunn._

  THE CHAPTER-HOUSE.
]

About thirty years after the Chapter-House was first built it began to
be used as the meeting-place of the House of Commons, at the time when
the Commons were separated from the Lords. The last time that the
Commons sate in the Westminster Chapter-House was on the last day of
Henry VIII’s reign, and the last act passed there was the attainder of
the Duke of Norfolk (1546). In 1547 the House of Commons moved to the
Chapel of St. Stephen in the Palace of Westminster, and the
Chapter-House began to be used as the Record Office. It is curious, when
we look at the Chapter-House as it is now, to think that it was once all
lined round with galleries and cupboards, and that the Records of the
kingdom were kept here until 1864. Soon afterwards the Chapter-House was
restored to its present state, and is no doubt very like what it was in
Henry III’s time. While it was the Record Office, Domesday Book and many
other most precious books and documents had their home at Westminster.

Under the Chapter-House is a crypt, of which the walls are eighteen feet
thick, and which, long centuries ago, was used as the Royal Treasury.
The Regalia and stores of money were kept there. In 1303 a terrible
thing happened. There was a great robbery of the Royal Treasure; the
money which Edward I had collected for the Scottish wars was stolen, as
well as part of the Regalia. It is sad to think that some of the
Westminster monks had to do with this disgraceful robbery, but they were
found out and punished.

Below the pavement of the entrance to the Chapter-House are buried (1)
Abbot Edwyn, the friend and adviser of Edward the Confessor, and the
first Abbot of his new monastery; (2) Hugolin, who was Chamberlain and
Treasurer to the Confessor; and (3) Sulcard, a monk, who wrote the first
history of the Abbey. In the vestibule, close to the Chapter-House, are
the modern window and tablet in memory of James Russell Lowell, the
well-known American poet and prose writer. Lowell was for many years the
United States Minister in London, and was much beloved, both in this
country and his own.

The Chapel of the Pyx, close by the Chapter-House, was formerly the
monastic Treasury. At one time the Regalia were kept there. The Chapel
is so called from the “pyx,” or box, which contained the standard coins
of the realm, used for testing our current coinage. The pyx has now been
moved to the Mint, but the Chapel still keeps its ancient name. The
Chapel of the Pyx, and the buildings next to it, belong to the Norman
time, and over them the monks’ Dormitory was built. Part of the old
Dormitory is now used as the Chapter Library, and part as the Great
School.

Most of the treasures in the old monastic library were destroyed in the
time of Edward VI; and unfortunately, many of the books collected by the
earlier Deans were destroyed in a fire in 1694.

Another very interesting part of the monastic buildings was the
Refectory, or dining-hall of the monks. The first Refectory was built,
probably, in the early Norman times, and was a stately room. It was
rebuilt in the reign of Edward III, when it was made still larger, and
only the lower part of the old Norman walls was kept. Some of this
Norman wall can still be seen.

In the book of the “Customs” of the monastery, or “Consuetudines,” as
the long Latin name goes, are very strict rules about behaviour at
meals. No monk might speak at all, and even the guests might only
whisper. No one was to sit with his hand on his chin, or with his hand
over his head, because that might look as if he were in pain. No one
might lean on his elbows, or stare, or crack nuts with his teeth. All
these old rules seem to be very good ones, and might be useful to some
people in the twentieth century.

But the Refectory is interesting for many historical reasons. Here, in
1252, Henry III swore to observe Magna Charta. Henry, standing with the
Book of the Gospels in one hand and a lighted taper in the other, and
surrounded by the Archbishops and other great clergy, took his solemn
oath. Upon this they all dashed their tapers on the ground, saying “So
go out, with smoke and stench, the accursed souls of those who break or
pervert the Charter.”

In 1294, Edward I held a great council of clergy and laity in the
Refectory at Westminster. On this occasion the King was demanding a
subsidy of half their possessions, to the consternation of the assembled
council. The Dean of St. Paul’s was trying to persuade the King not to
ask so much, and in his anxiety and excitement the poor man fell dead at
Edward’s feet. The old history says that Edward took very little
notice,—“passed over this event with indifferent eyes,” and insisted on
having what he asked.

It was in the Refectory that the Commons impeached Piers Gaveston, the
favourite and bad adviser of Edward II. And besides this, the Commons
met here several times during the reigns of Richard II, Henry IV, and
Henry V, so we see that this great hall has been very closely connected
with the history of England.

It is supposed that part of the large quantity of stone granted to
Protector Somerset was taken from the Refectory. This stone was used by
him in the building of Somerset House.

Another important part of the monastery was the Infirmary, the place
where the old and infirm monks lived in their old age. It stood on the
site of what is now called the Little Cloister, but the present Little
Cloister is much more modern, and belongs to what is called the
“Jacobean” time.

The low, barrel-vaulted passages which lead from the Great Cloister to
the site of the old Infirmary are some of the very oldest parts of the
Abbey buildings, as they were built, if not actually during the
Confessor’s lifetime, at any rate by the first Norman Kings. They are
therefore more than 800 years old. In one of the ancient Norman rooms,
below the former Dormitory of the monks, the Dean and Chapter have
lately arranged a very interesting kind of museum, containing various
fragments of old carving and other valuable relics of former times.
There, too, have been placed the very oldest of the wax effigies, which
are too battered and ragged to be shown with the others in the Islip
Chantry. Here are the rather ghastly remains of the effigies of Edward
III and Philippa, Henry V and Katherine de Valois, of Mary Tudor and
some others.

Round to the left, through an even darker bit of Cloister, was the
Infirmary, of which we were just now speaking. The Infirmary was almost
a monastery in itself, having a cloister, a garden, and a very beautiful
chapel of its own. This chapel was built in the twelfth century, and was
dedicated to St. Katherine. Some of its arches still remain in the
garden of one of the modern houses. Many interesting things took place
in St. Katherine’s Chapel. One of these was a famous struggle between
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York as to which was to sit in the
chief place on the right hand of the Papal Legate. It was settled that
the Archbishop of Canterbury was to have the precedence, and be called
“Primate of all England.” Another interesting event connected with St.
Katherine’s Chapel, and a pleasanter one to think of, is the
consecration of St. Hugh of Lincoln in 1186. St. Hugh was a pupil and
disciple of St. Bruno, and came to his northern bishopric from the
famous monastery of the Grande Chartreuse in the south of France. The
old garden of the Infirmary is still the Abbey garden, and lies just
beyond the Little Cloister. Close to it is the ancient Jewel House,
where the King’s jewels used to be kept. It was built by Richard II on a
piece of ground which was bought from the Abbey by Edward III in the
last year of his reign.

Other parts of the monastery, such as the granary, the malt-house,
brew-house, and bake-house, stood in the square or court which is now
called Dean’s Yard. Parts of some of these ancient buildings still
remain below the modern houses. We shall hear of the granary again, in
another chapter.

In former days Dean’s Yard used to be known as “The Elms,” and was
enclosed by the old monastery walls.

The Almonry, or place where the alms of the monastery used to be given
to the poor, was on the south-west side of Broad Sanctuary. It was close
to the Almonry that Caxton set up his printing-press.

We can easily see what an important place a great monastery must have
been, when we think of all its different parts, and of the work of
various kinds that went on in it.

But we must not take leave of the old monastic buildings and life
without saying a few words about the Sanctuary, which played an
important part in the Abbey history, and even in the history of England.
It has already been told how Queen Elizabeth Woodville “took Sanctuary,”
as they said in those days, and how Edward V was born while she was at
Westminster. The Abbey, like many other great religious houses, had the
right of Sanctuary. That is to say, people who took refuge there could
not be carried off to prison, or injured in any way. It was considered
an awful thing to kill any one who was in Sanctuary. In the rough and
cruel times of the Middle Ages it was perhaps a good thing for people to
have such a refuge, and no doubt many helpless and innocent persons were
then saved from violence and injustice. But, as might be expected, many
bad people used to fly into Sanctuary, and as time went on this became a
great abuse. Queen Elizabeth took away some of the privileges of
Sanctuary, and in James I’s reign it was done away with altogether.

The actual Sanctuary Tower, which was a square Norman fortress, stood
very much where Westminster Hospital now stands. Close to this tower
there was a belfry, where some famous bells used to hang.

Near the Sanctuary Tower was the old Gatehouse, or prison, of the
monastery. It was in this Gatehouse that Sir Walter Raleigh spent the
last night of his life, and other well-known people were imprisoned
there, such as John Hampden, and Richard Lovelace, the Cavalier poet.




                              CHAPTER XII
                           SOME OF THE ABBOTS

  “_It is no small thing to dwell in monasteries, or in a
  congregation, and to live there without complaint, and to persevere
  faithfully even unto death._”

                                          (_The Imitation of Christ._)


The name of Abbot Edwyn, who was the first Abbot to rule over the
Confessor’s newly founded monastery, leads us on to think of some few
others among the Abbots who played a part in English history. We may
begin by mentioning the name of Abbot Gilbert Crispin, a Norman, who was
Abbot during the time of the Norman Kings, from 1085 to 1117. He had
been a monk at the famous monastery of Bec in Normandy, and was a pupil
of St. Anselm and of Lanfranc. Crispin was a learned man, and ruled the
Abbey during a stormy time in English history. William Rufus seems to
have had a great regard for him, and for the love he bore him he was
kinder to the Westminster monks than to many others. It was while
Crispin was Abbot that the Confessor’s tomb was first opened.

In his time, too, Henry I’s marriage with the Saxon princess, Matilda,
took place, and on the same day, 11th November 1100, Matilda’s
Coronation by Archbishop Anselm.

Two of the Abbots in the early Plantagenet times obtained from the Pope
the right to wear a mitre and other outward marks of dignity. In later
days the “mitred Abbot” of Westminster sate in the House of Lords, next
after the Bishops. In Henry III’s reign the Abbey was made independent
of the Bishop of London, and it keeps that independent position down to
our own day.

Abbot Berkyng, who was a great friend and adviser of Henry III, was one
of the people who signed Magna Charta. He was a Privy Councillor, and
finally Lord Treasurer. He was also one of the Lords Justices of the
kingdom while Henry III was away at the Welsh wars in 1245. This shows
us what important men the Abbots were in those days. Abbot Berkyng died
in 1246, and was first buried in front of the altar of Henry III’s Lady
Chapel. His body now lies in the South Ambulatory, close to the steps of
Henry VII’s Chapel.

The next Abbot we will mention is Abbot Ware. His name is interesting
because in 1267, while Henry III was building his new Abbey Church,
Abbot Ware went on a visit to Rome, and brought back with him the
materials for the wonderful mosaic pavement in the Sacrarium, and the
materials for the decoration of the Confessor’s shrine. He also brought
with him the Italian workmen who laid the pavement, and who made the
lovely glass and gold mosaics for the shrine. It was Abbot Ware who drew
up the “customs” of which we have just heard, with all kinds of rules
and directions for behaviour.

We must now pass over nearly a century, and speak of one very able and
energetic Abbot who did a great deal of building in the Nave, the
cloisters, and elsewhere in the monastery. This was Nicholas Litlington,
who was made Abbot in 1362, in succession to Abbot Langham. Abbot
Langham, who was made a Cardinal by the Pope, is buried in a very fine
tomb in St. Benedict’s Chapel. He left a large sum of money to the
Abbey, and this money was used by Abbot Litlington for building.
Litlington died in 1386, and is buried in the South Transept.

The fine rooms known as the College Hall and Jerusalem Chamber were
built by Abbot Litlington somewhere about the end of Edward III’s reign,
when he rebuilt the Abbot’s house. It is thought that there had probably
been an earlier Jerusalem Chamber on the same site as the present one.
The name is said to have been given to the room because the tapestries
which hung on the walls represented scenes from the history of
Jerusalem.

It has already been told how Henry IV died in this famous room, and how
Shakspeare describes the scene in his play.

Another interesting bit of English history to be remembered in the
Jerusalem Chamber is the banquet given to the French Ambassadors in
1624, by Lord Keeper Williams, then Dean of Westminster, in honour of
Charles I’s marriage with Henrietta Maria of France. Dean Williams
restored and decorated the room for this occasion, and on the cedarwood
mantelpiece are small carved heads representing Charles I and his French
bride.

Much important work of various kinds has been done in the Jerusalem
Chamber. The Assembly of Divines held its meetings here in 1643, during
the time of the Commonwealth, and drew up the Longer and Shorter
Catechism, and the Confession of Faith, known as the “Westminster
Confession.”

Here, too, the Revisors of the Old and New Testaments used to meet for
their great work, which began in 1870.

[Illustration:

  [_D. Weller_.

  THE JERUSALEM CHAMBER.
]

The Jerusalem Chamber is now used as the Chapter-House, because the
actual Chapter-House still belongs to the Government, and not to the
Abbey.

The College Hall, which was built by Abbot Litlington to be his
refectory or dining-hall, is now used as the dining-hall for the
Westminster scholars. It is a beautiful room, with long windows in the
Early Perpendicular style, and a minstrels’ gallery at one end. The
fireplace, or stove, is in the middle of the room, and gives it a very
old-world look. The long tables in the hall are said to be made of
chestnut wood from the wrecked ships of the Spanish Armada, and to have
been given to the school by Queen Elizabeth.

The College Hall forms one side of the old courtyard of the “Abbot’s
place” (or palace) as it was called, part of which house is now the
Deanery.

Litlington’s successor, Abbot Colchester, is said to have joined in a
conspiracy against Henry IV. This story was evidently accepted by
Shakspeare, for in his play, _King Richard II_, he writes—

             “The grand Conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
             With clog of conscience and sour melancholy,
             Hath yielded up his body to the grave.”

There is, however, no good foundation for the story of Abbot
Colchester’s conspiracy, and he lived on quietly until 1420.

Two of the Abbots of Henry VII’S reign, Abbot Esteney and Abbot Islip,
did a good deal of building in the church and precincts. The great West
Window was set up in Abbot Esteney’s time, and the tracery shows how
entirely different the Perpendicular style of architecture is from the
Early English, in which the rest of the Abbey is built. The glass of the
West Window was put in much later, during the reign of George II.

In Abbot Islip’s time Henry VII’s Chapel was built, the Abbot himself
laying the foundation-stone. The western towers were carried up as far
as the roof, and some rooms were added to the Abbot’s house. One of
these is the charming panelled room known as the Jericho Parlour.

In the Nave, just over the Dean’s entrance, is a wooden gallery, which
is called the “Abbot’s Pew.” This, too, was put up by Abbot Islip. Islip
also fitted up the beautiful little Chapel which is named after him, and
in which he is buried. On the frieze of the Chapel are curious little
carvings, representing the Abbot’s name. One is an eye, with a hand
holding a branch, or slip: I-slip. Another is a man slipping from the
branch of a tree: “I slip.” A little design like this is properly called
a “rebus,” and there are many of them to be found on tombs erected about
that time.

In the Chantry above Islip’s Chapel are the wax effigies, about which we
have already read.

The last Abbot, John Feckenham, who was appointed in Mary Tudor’s time,
had suffered much for his religion during the reign of Edward VI. But in
spite of having himself been persecuted he was a kind and tolerant man,
and was good to the Protestants who were persecuted in Queen Mary’s
time.

Abbot Feckenham went to visit Lady Jane Grey in prison, and was with her
on the scaffold, but he could not persuade her to give up her Protestant
form of faith.

It was Abbot Feckenham who restored the Confessor’s shrine after it had
been all dismantled and partially destroyed in the reign of Henry VIII.

The funeral of Anne of Cleves took place in Feckenham’s time. Anne had
become a Roman Catholic. She died at Chelsea in 1557, and was buried
with great state by Queen Mary’s order.

On 24th December 1558, Abbot Feckenham must have taken part in the last
royal funeral service held in the Abbey according to the Roman Catholic
rite. This was the service ordered by Queen Elizabeth on the death of
the Emperor Charles V, who was Queen Mary’s father-in-law.

Feckenham quite refused to obey Queen Elizabeth’s laws concerning Church
matters, although Elizabeth seems to have been very kindly disposed
towards him.

When the monastery was dissolved in 1559 the Abbot and some of the monks
were sent to the Tower, and Feckenham lived on for twenty-five years in
a kind of captivity, though he did not remain at the Tower. He was a
very good man: kind to the poor and suffering, and steadfast to what he
believed to be right. Since his day the Abbey has been governed by a
Dean and Chapter, and the monastic life has ended.




                              CHAPTER XIII
                           WESTMINSTER SCHOOL

  “_Enflamed with the study of learning, and the admiration of virtue;
  stirred up with high hopes of living to be brave men and worthy
  patriots, dear to God, and famous to all ages._”

                                        MILTON (_Tract on Education_).


Before we say farewell to the Abbey and its story altogether we must
speak of one very important part of it, and one that ought to be
specially interesting to all English children, namely, the ancient and
famous Westminster School.

The history of the School takes us back really to Saxon times, as we
know that there was a school belonging to the monastery in the
Confessor’s days, and it may have been there even earlier than that.
There is a charming little story of that old convent school in the
eleventh century. The Abbot of Croyland used to tell of the kindness he
received from the Lady Editha, wife of the Confessor, when he was a boy
at the monk’s school in the cloisters. When she met him coming from
school, Editha would question him about his studies, and then, he says:
“She would always present me with three or four pieces of money, which
were counted out to me by her handmaiden, and then send me to the royal
larder to refresh myself.”

The School seems to have been what was called a “Grammar School,” which
really meant that Latin was taught there, for in those old days they
used to speak of Latin as “grammar.” The school was probably a place of
general education, and not intended only for boys who were going to
become monks. But, of course, when speaking of Westminster School it
must be remembered that it owes its present form, and its wide influence
and prosperity, to its foundation by two of the Tudor sovereigns, King
Henry VIII and Queen Elizabeth.

In 1540, Henry VIII established the School with two masters and forty
scholars. There were probably other boys as well. The School went on and
flourished during the reigns of Edward VI and Mary, and then, when the
monastery was finally dissolved, it was re-established by Queen
Elizabeth in 1560. Queen Elizabeth kept very much to her father’s plan,
and arranged for a Headmaster, an undermaster, and forty scholars, who
are called “King’s scholars” or “Queen’s scholars,” according to whether
the sovereign is a King or a Queen. It was settled that the School was
to be part of the Collegiate Foundation of St. Peter in Westminster, and
the Dean was to be head of the school, just as he was of the rest of the
College.

As we already know, the boys dined, as now, in Abbot Litlington’s
Refectory, the present College Hall. The old granary of the monastery,
which stood in the middle of what is now Dean’s Yard, was fitted up as
their dormitory, and there also they used to do what a modern boy would
call his “home-work.” This arrangement was made for them by the first
Dean of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, Dr. William Bill.

In those old days there must have been a good deal of what we should
call hardship, for nearly every one now lives a much more comfortable
life than people did in the Elizabethan times.

The Great School is part of what used to be the monks’ dormitory. It is
a splendid room, first built in the Norman days, and then altered or
rebuilt in the fourteenth century. It stands on a lower storey which is
part of the Norman buildings. The School was very well restored not many
years ago. Besides the Great School there are, of course, many
class-rooms.

The King’s scholars now live in a fine building which was begun in Dean
Atterbury’s time, and designed by Sir Christopher Wren. It is here that
the famous “Westminster Play” is acted every year, about Christmas time.
The performance of this Latin play is a very old custom, and probably
began in the time of Queen Elizabeth. If any member of the Royal Family
has died during the year the play is not given.

Another curious old custom in the school is the tossing of the pancake
on Shrove Tuesday. This takes place in the Great School. In former days,
when classes were held in the Great School, there used to be a curtain
hung right across, to divide the upper and lower schools. This curtain
hung from an iron rod, which still remains, although the curtain has
gone. Every Shrove Tuesday the college cook has to bring a very solid
sort of pancake and throw it over this high bar. No doubt he has to
practise a good deal before he can do it properly, and he does not
always throw it over the first time. The boys scramble to catch it, and
if any boy gets the whole pancake the Dean’s Verger leads him to the
Dean, who gives him a guinea.

[Illustration:

  [_W. Rice, F.R.P.S._

  LITTLE DEAN’S YARD—ENTRANCE TO GREAT SCHOOL.
]

In old days the whole school might join in the scramble, and rather a
dangerous one it was. Now it has been arranged that only a certain
number of boys may struggle for the pancake, these boys being chosen
from various forms.

Some of the most celebrated of the Westminster scholars have graves or
monuments in the Abbey, and thus are doubly connected with Westminster.
A few of these have already been mentioned, as, for example, Ben Jonson,
the famous poet and dramatist, and the poets Abraham Cowley, George
Herbert, John Dryden, William Cowper, and Robert Southey.

Matthew Prior, a poet much admired in his own day, was also a
Westminster scholar. He died in 1721, and was buried near Spenser. His
monument is near Poets’ Corner door.

Barton Booth, a well-known actor in the eighteenth century, was at
Westminster school. He died in 1733, and his widow put up a monument to
him in Poets’ Corner many years afterwards. Two streets in Westminster
are named in memory of him. One of these is Barton street, and the other
is Cowley street, called after Booth’s burial-place at Cowley, in
Middlesex. Both these streets are close to the Abbey precincts.

Most people have heard of the famous Headmaster of Westminster in the
seventeenth century, Dr. Richard Busby. He was Headmaster during the
troublous times of the Civil War and the Commonwealth, and was still
headmaster in the reigns of Charles II and James II. He was a very
remarkable man, and had many distinguished pupils. He was celebrated
both for scholarship and for severity.

It is told of Dr. Busby that on one occasion, when Charles II paid an
unexpected visit to the School, he would not take off his hat in the
King’s presence, for fear that if he did so the boys might think less of
his authority.

Dr. Busby died in 1695, and was buried in the South Transept. His
monument is very interesting, partly on account of the pathetic figure
of Busby and the fine expression of the face.

One of his remarkable pupils is buried near him, and the monuments are
quite close to one another. This pupil was Dr. Robert South, a great
preacher, and Prebendary of Westminster. South could remember seeing
Cromwell when he first appeared in Parliament, and heard Charles I
prayed for in the Abbey on the very day of his death, “that black and
eternally infamous day of the King’s murder.” Dr. South died in 1716.

There was always a great deal of Royalist feeling in the School, even
all through the Commonwealth time, and a leading Independent went so far
as to say that it would never be well with the nation until the School
was suppressed, so strongly did the boys take the Royalist side.

Dean Atterbury, of whom we have already heard, was a Westminster
scholar, and a pupil of Dr. Busby. As we know, he took a great part in
the plots to bring back James II’s son, some of which plots went on in a
secret chamber in the Deanery itself.

Richard Hakluyt, author of the _Voyages and Travels_; Warren Hastings,
of Indian fame; and the well-known statesman, Lord John Russell, all
formerly Westminster boys, have already been mentioned. In Statesmen’s
Corner is the large monument of Lord Mansfield, Lord Chief Justice of
England in 1756. He was also a Westminster scholar, and desired to be
buried in the Abbey, “from the love which he bore to the place of his
early education.” He died in 1793.

Charles Wesley and his elder brother Samuel were both educated at
Westminster School. The memorial to John and Charles Wesley in the South
Choir aisle has already been described. It is interesting to remember
that Westminster School was in this way directly connected with one of
the most important religious movements in England during the eighteenth
century.

Among the great soldiers who were at Westminster School were Lord Lucan,
the Marquis of Anglesey, and Lord Raglan. John Locke, the philosopher,
Sir Christopher Wren, the great architect, and Edward Gibbon, author of
the famous _Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, were also Westminster
boys.

And now our travels through the centuries and round the Abbey, with all
its memories, must end. We have seen how that little Church on Thorney
Isle has gradually grown into this stately Abbey, the home of all the
great Anglo-Saxon race. We have seen too, at the same time, how the
little English kingdom of the early Saxon days has expanded into a
world-wide empire. It is for the children of Great Britain to see that
the Abbey shall stand, not only for noble memories, but also for high
hopes,—hopes, not only of riches and worldly success, but of the
righteousness that exalteth a nation.




           _Printed by_ MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED, _Edinburgh_

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN'S STORY OF WESTMINSTER
ABBEY ***

***** This file should be named 63628-0.txt or 63628-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/6/2/63628/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

